Languages/TypeScript/1. Introduction.md, before:

# Introduction

[TOC]



## TypeScript

- statically typed superset of JS
- elevated development experience with powerful tooling around static type-checking
- zero cost since syntax is otherwise equal to JS, transpiles to plain JS

### Types

- turns dynamically typed language back into statically typed language
- takes JS type system and writes it down, static formalisation of JS's dynamic type system
- enforces the subset of JS that makes sense, not the one that is syntactically valid
- but much more powerful types than in any other classical language
  - implicit inference hides a lot of typing
  - types are narrowed down based on control flow, type guards, assignments, etc.
  - conditional types, everything is a type
- doesn't force you to strongly type everything, no binary choice, can dial it up gradually, the more types the better checking
- can use types to build documentation, no need to annotate just for documentation, avoids extra layer of complexity and potential errors

### Tooling

- types is what allows for powerful tooling, because values have different functionality based on their types, e.g. control flow, function arguments, available methods (a `toString()` method but not necessarily a `toUpperCase()` method), etc.
- needs to restrict values so can reason about behavior during development
- powerful tooling, e.g. error checking, statement completion, safe refactoring, code navigation etc.
- tooling during development right when needs it, not only later when trying to run it
- no more unit test for every line of code, can sleep again well at night
- knows all the stuff the programmer is otherwise supposed to know by heart
- statement completion in context, only the semantically valid, not just all variables the scope has access to like in other IDEs

### Zero-cost

- removes types completely on transpilation to JS
- no performance overhead since it all "transpiles away", as if you had written JS in the first place (but without bugs)
- no extra code is injected, transpiles away to plain JS
- just for error checking during development
- exact same runtime behavior and syntax, no translation, only layer on top
- type checking makes sense only during development anyways, on client during execution can not do anything, like a ship out on the sea, can not fix if it breaks down in production
- TS doesn't prevent transpilation if there is a type related error, since is still valid JS
- beware if has API that others are going to use, security is gone as soon as transpiled to JS, e.g. `readonly` properties, `private` class members ⚠️

### Superset

- technically it's own language, but follows exactly ECMAScript specs, doesn't diverge from standard, just adds static types
- (diverged from ECMAScript standard with enums, namespaces, decorators)
- like JavaScript with type annotations, no overhead in translating JS implementation into TS implementation
- implements new JS features when they reach Stage 3, can use newest features
- transpiles backwards for older ES versions, but better use only for types and use Babel for transpilation



## Implicit typing

- types get inferred where ever possible, e.g. in variable assignment, return statement of function, object properties, array elements, etc.
- don't need to provide types for everything, but safer so can not later accidentally change them, and use them for documentation

```typescript
let age = 42;

age.toUpperCase(); // Property 'toUpperCase' does not exist on type 'number'.ts(2339)
```

- the declared type determines the types that are allowed to be assigned, even if in meantime had a more specific type

```typescript
let x = Math.random() < 0.5 ? 42 : "world"; // string | number

x = 1;
x = "goodbye!";
// both valid assignments since declared type was string | number
```



## Structural typing

- type compatibility is checked using duck typing ("If it walks like a duck and quacks like a duck, it is a duck!")
- an object type is compatible with another, as long as it implements _at least_ all properties of the other

```typescript
interface Named {
  name: string;
}

function sayHi(obj: Named) {
  console.log(`Hi, my name is ${obj.name}.`);
}

// 'p' implements at least all properties of 'Named'
const p = { name: "Peter", age: 42 };
sayHi(p);
```

```typescript
interface Named {
  name: string;
}

class Person {
  name: string;
  age: number;

  constructor(name, age) {
    this.name = name;
    this.age = age;
  }
}

// 'Person' implements at least all properties of 'Named'
const q: Named = new Person("Peter", 42);
```

- excess property checking: object literals aren't allowed to have more properties than specified when assigning them directly to variables or passing them as arguments to functions, often source of bugs, can allow by assigning it to new variable with type inference and using that variable

```typescript
interface Named {
  name: string;
}

function sayHi(obj: Named) {
  console.log(`Hi, my name is ${obj.name}.`);
}

sayHi({ name: "Peter", age: 42 }); // Object literal may only specify known properties, and 'age' does not exist in type 'Named'.(2345)

const p = { name: "Peter", age: 42 };
sayHi(p);
```

```typescript
interface Named {
  name: string;
}

const q: Named = { name: "Peter", age: 42 }; // Object literal may only specify known properties, and 'age' does not exist in type 'Named'.(2345)

const p = { name: "Peter", age: 42 };
const q: Named = p;
```

- if all properties are optional, must at least implement one, i.e. not none

```typescript
interface Named {
  gender?: string;
}

const p = { name: "Peter", age: 42 };
const q: Named = p; // Type '{ name: string; age: number; }' has no properties in common with type 'Named'.(2559)
```

- a function type is compatible with another, as long as the other implements _at least_ all parameter types of it and the other type's return type is a subtype of its return type, the parameter names can be different

```typescript
let f = (a: number) => ({name: "Peter", age: 42});
let g = (x: number, y: string) => ({name: "Peter"});

g = f; // ✅
f = g; // ❌
```

- function parameter bivariance: parameter types of function types are compatible, as long as one is assignable to the other, using `strictFunctionTypes` flag only if parameter type of source is assignable to parameter type of target

```typescript
interface Named {
    name: string;
}

interface Person {
    name: string;
    age: number;
}

let f = (a: Named) => {};
let g = (b: Person) => {};

g = f; // ✅, parameter of source is subtype of parameter of target
f = g; // ✅, parameter of target is subtype of parameter of source, ❌ with strictFunctionTypes flag
```

- classes are compatible, if their instance object types are compatible, i.e. static properties and the constructor are ignored ❗️
- beware: classes containing private or protected instance properties are _not_ compatible, only if those instance properties originate from the same class



## Control Flow Analysis

- TS narrows down types to more specific types when it can
- in if statements, switch statements, loops, conditional ternaries, etc.
- using type guards in condition, e.g. `typeof`, `instanceof`, equality operator, truthiness, see Type operators
- beware: TS doesn't catch all edge cases of JS, needs to still understand JS ❗️
- can check if type is `never` to not forget a code path, e.g. a missing case in switch statement, if...else statements, etc.

```typescript
function assertNever(object: never): never {
    throw new Error("You forgot to handle a control flow path.")
}

type Shape = { kind: "circle" } | { kind: "rectangle" } | { kind: "square" };

declare let shape: Shape;

switch (shape.kind) {
    case "circle":
        /* ... */
        break;
    case "rectangle":
        /* ... */
        break;
    default:
        assertNever(shape); // Argument of type '{ kind: "square"; }' is not assignable to parameter of type 'never'.(2345)
}
```



## Resources

- [The New TypeScript Handbook](https://github.com/microsoft/TypeScript-New-Handbook)
- [Anders Hejlsberg - What's new in TypeScript](https://channel9.msdn.com/Events/Speakers/Anders-Hejlsberg)
- [TSConf 2018](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL2z7rCjEG2ksF0rJ8Qwp1y5eTjqiPIRfT), [TSConf 2019](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL2z7rCjEG2kumYQw0tl-afLYWUk-kKREB)
- [dotJS 2018 - Anders Hejlsberg - TypeScript: Static types for JavaScript](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ET4kT88JRXs)

Commit message:

fix: In Basic Types clarify disciminated union, move note about type inference for variable declarations into 'Implicit typing' in Introduction. In Type operators add note about index signature in mapped types. Minor grammar fixes.

Languages/TypeScript/1. Introduction.md, after:

# Introduction

[TOC]



## TypeScript

- statically typed superset of JS
- elevated development experience with powerful tooling around static type-checking
- zero cost since syntax is otherwise equal to JS, transpiles to plain JS

### Types

- turns dynamically typed language back into statically typed language, i.e. variable can hold only specified data type
- takes JS type system and writes it down, static formalisation of JS's dynamic type system
- enforces the subset of JS that makes sense, not the one that is syntactically valid
- but much more powerful types than in any other classical language
  - implicit inference hides a lot of typing
  - types are narrowed down based on control flow, type guards, assignments, etc.
  - conditional types, everything is a type
- doesn't force you to strongly type everything, no binary choice, can dial it up gradually, the more types the better checking
- can use types to build documentation, no need to annotate just for documentation, avoids extra layer of complexity and potential errors

### Tooling

- types is what allows for powerful tooling, because values have different functionality based on their types, e.g. control flow, function arguments, available methods (a `toString()` method but not necessarily a `toUpperCase()` method), etc.
- needs to restrict values so can reason about behavior during development
- powerful tooling, e.g. error checking, statement completion, safe refactoring, code navigation etc.
- tooling during development right when needs it, not only later when trying to run it
- no more unit test for every line of code, can sleep again well at night
- knows all the stuff the programmer is otherwise supposed to know by heart
- statement completion in context, only the semantically valid, not just all variables the scope has access to like in other IDEs

### Zero-cost

- removes types completely on transpilation to JS
- no performance overhead since it all "transpiles away", as if you had written JS in the first place (but without bugs)
- no extra code is injected, transpiles away to plain JS
- just for error checking during development
- exact same runtime behavior and syntax, no translation, only layer on top
- type checking makes sense only during development anyways, on client during execution can not do anything, like a ship out on the sea, can not fix if it breaks down in production
- TS doesn't prevent transpilation if there is a type related error, since is still valid JS
- beware if has API that others are going to use, security is gone as soon as transpiled to JS, e.g. `readonly` properties, `private` class members ⚠️

### Superset

- technically it's own language, but follows exactly ECMAScript specs, doesn't diverge from standard, just adds static types
- (diverged from ECMAScript standard with enums, namespaces, decorators)
- like JavaScript with type annotations, no overhead in translating JS implementation into TS implementation
- implements new JS features when they reach Stage 3, can use newest features
- transpiles backwards for older ES versions, but better use only for types and use Babel for transpilation



## Implicit typing

- types get inferred where ever possible, e.g. in variable assignment, return statement of function, object properties, array elements, etc.
- don't need to provide types for everything, but safer so can not later accidentally change them, and use them for documentation

```typescript
let age = 42;

age.toUpperCase(); // Property 'toUpperCase' does not exist on type 'number'.ts(2339)
```

- the declared type determines the types that are allowed to be assigned, even if in meantime had a more specific type

```typescript
let x = Math.random() < 0.5 ? 42 : "world"; // string | number

x = 1;
x = "goodbye!";
// both valid assignments since declared type was string | number
```

- variable declarations with `const` infer literal type, i.e. `const x = 42` is inferred to be of type `42` not of type `number` ❗️
- variable declarations with `let` and `var` infer general type, i.e. `let x = 42` is inferred to be of type `number` not of type `42` ❗️

```typescript
let x = 42; // number
let y: 42 = 42; // 42

x = 21;
y = 21; // Type '21' is not assignable to type '42'.(2322)
```

- `readonly` properties infer the literal type, similarly to `const` variable declarations 



## Structural typing

- type compatibility is checked using duck typing ("If it walks like a duck and quacks like a duck, it is a duck!")
- an object type is compatible with another, as long as it implements _at least_ all properties of the other

```typescript
interface Named {
  name: string;
}

function sayHi(obj: Named) {
  console.log(`Hi, my name is ${obj.name}.`);
}

// 'p' implements at least all properties of 'Named'
const p = { name: "Peter", age: 42 };
sayHi(p);
```

```typescript
interface Named {
  name: string;
}

class Person {
  name: string;
  age: number;

  constructor(name, age) {
    this.name = name;
    this.age = age;
  }
}

// 'Person' implements at least all properties of 'Named'
const q: Named = new Person("Peter", 42);
```

- excess property checking: object literals aren't allowed to have more properties than specified when assigning them directly to variables or passing them as arguments to functions, often source of bugs, can allow by assigning it to new variable with type inference and using that variable

```typescript
interface Named {
  name: string;
}

function sayHi(obj: Named) {
  console.log(`Hi, my name is ${obj.name}.`);
}

sayHi({ name: "Peter", age: 42 }); // Object literal may only specify known properties, and 'age' does not exist in type 'Named'.(2345)

const p = { name: "Peter", age: 42 };
sayHi(p);
```

```typescript
interface Named {
  name: string;
}

const q: Named = { name: "Peter", age: 42 }; // Object literal may only specify known properties, and 'age' does not exist in type 'Named'.(2345)

const p = { name: "Peter", age: 42 };
const q: Named = p;
```

- if all properties are optional, must at least implement one, i.e. not none

```typescript
interface Named {
  gender?: string;
}

const p = { name: "Peter", age: 42 };
const q: Named = p; // Type '{ name: string; age: number; }' has no properties in common with type 'Named'.(2559)
```

- a function type is compatible with another, as long as the other implements _at least_ all parameter types of it and the other type's return type is a subtype of its return type, the parameter names can be different

```typescript
let f = (a: number) => ({name: "Peter", age: 42});
let g = (x: number, y: string) => ({name: "Peter"});

g = f; // ✅
f = g; // ❌
```

- function parameter bivariance: parameter types of function types are compatible, as long as one is assignable to the other, using `strictFunctionTypes` flag only if parameter type of source is assignable to parameter type of target

```typescript
interface Named {
    name: string;
}

interface Person {
    name: string;
    age: number;
}

let f = (a: Named) => {};
let g = (b: Person) => {};

g = f; // ✅, parameter of source is subtype of parameter of target
f = g; // ✅, parameter of target is subtype of parameter of source, ❌ with strictFunctionTypes flag
```

- classes are compatible, if their instance object types are compatible, i.e. static properties and the constructor are ignored ❗️
- beware: classes containing private or protected instance properties are _not_ compatible, only if those instance properties originate from the same class



## Control Flow Analysis

- TS narrows down types to more specific types when it can
- in if statements, switch statements, loops, conditional ternaries, etc.
- using type guards in condition, e.g. `typeof`, `instanceof`, equality operator, truthiness, see Type operators
- beware: TS doesn't catch all edge cases of JS, needs to still understand JS ❗️
- can check if type is `never` to not forget a code path, e.g. a missing case in switch statement, if...else statements, etc.

```typescript
function assertNever(object: never): never {
    throw new Error("You forgot to handle a control flow path.")
}

type Shape = { kind: "circle" } | { kind: "rectangle" } | { kind: "square" };

declare let shape: Shape;

switch (shape.kind) {
    case "circle":
        /* ... */
        break;
    case "rectangle":
        /* ... */
        break;
    default:
        assertNever(shape); // Argument of type '{ kind: "square"; }' is not assignable to parameter of type 'never'.(2345)
}
```



## Resources

- [The New TypeScript Handbook](https://github.com/microsoft/TypeScript-New-Handbook)
- [Anders Hejlsberg - What's new in TypeScript](https://channel9.msdn.com/Events/Speakers/Anders-Hejlsberg)
- [TSConf 2018](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL2z7rCjEG2ksF0rJ8Qwp1y5eTjqiPIRfT), [TSConf 2019](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL2z7rCjEG2kumYQw0tl-afLYWUk-kKREB)
- [dotJS 2018 - Anders Hejlsberg - TypeScript: Static types for JavaScript](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ET4kT88JRXs)
