Languages/TypeScript/3. Type aliases and interfaces.md, before:

# Type aliases and interfaces

[TOC]



## Type aliases

- alias for a type
- can be reused instead of typing out literal type
- alias names must be unique

```typescript
// variable type alias
type ID = number | string;

// object type alias
type Person = {
  firstName: string,
  lastName: string,
  age: number
};

// function type alias
type NumToString = (num: number) => string;
```

- aliases don't create new types, are just names for existing ones, i.e. can have two aliases for same type ❗️

```typescript
type s1 = string;
type s2 = string;

const p1: s1 = "Hello";
const p2: s2 = p1; // legal, since s1, s2 are aliasing the identical type string
```

- type aliases for object types can be extended using intersection types

```typescript
type Person = {
    name: string;
    age: number;
}

type Work = {
    profession: string;
}

type Adult = Person & Work;

const person1: Adult = {age: 42, name: "Peter", profession: "Teacher"};
```



## Interfaces

- alias for an _object_ type
- order of object properties doesn't matter
- use semicolons instead of colons, and no equal sign ❗️

```typescript
// object interface
interface Person {
  firstName: string;
  lastName: string;
  age: number;
  sayHi: (this: Person) => string; // bind this context to Person object
};
  
const person1: Person = {
  age: 42,
  firstName: "Peter",
  lastName: "Griffin",
  sayHi: function() {return "Hi, my name is" + this.firstName}
};

// function expression interface
interface NumToString {
  (num: number): string
}

const sayAge: NumToString = function(age: number) {
    return `Hello, I am ${age} years old.`;
}
```

- interfaces can extend other interfaces using the `extend` keyword, conciser syntax than intersection type with type aliases, multiple interfaces can be specified using comma

```typescript
interface Person {
    name: string;
    age: number;
}

interface Adult extends Person {
    profession: string;
}

const person1: Adult = {age: 42, name: "Peter", profession: "Teacher"};
```

- can even extend classes, class members are used as if they had been declared in interface without implementation
- interfaces allow for declaration merging, redeclaration of same interface, e.g. used for monkey-patching existing libraries

```typescript
interface Person {
    name: string;
    age: number;
}

interface Person {
    profession: string;
}

const person1: Person = {age: 42, name: "Peter", profession: "Teacher"};
```

- differences between interface and type alias for object type, see [StackOverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/37233735/typescript-interfaces-vs-types/52682220#52682220)

    | point | interface | type alias |
    | ----- | --------- | ---------- |
    | extension | `extends`, declaration merging | intersection type |
    | error messages | better | - |

- for object types interfaces are almost like type aliases, except they can be extended by redeclaration ("declaration merging") or the `extend` keyword instead of the intersection type, also they have clearer error messages, see [StackOverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/37233735/typescript-interfaces-vs-types/52682220#52682220)



## Index Signatures

- specify type of object properties by the way they can be indexed
- can use to type arbitrarily many properties in object literal, type alias, interface, class, etc.
- can be string or number, because JS allows indices to be string or number, e.g. `obj["somestr"]` and `obj[42]`
- but number index signature must be subtype of string index signature, since JS converts numeric indices to strings, e.g. `obj[100]` is actually just `obj["100"]` ❗️

```typescript
interface Person {
    [index: string]: string;
}

const p: Person = { name: "Peter", surname: "Wikler", age: 42 }; // Type 'number' is not assignable to type 'string'.(2322)
```

```typescript
interface Person {
    [index: string]: string | boolean;
    [index: number]: boolean
}

const p: Person = { name: "Peter", employed: true, "42": false };
const a = p[42]; // boolean
const b = p["42"]; // string | boolean
```

- beware: even though writes numeric property name as string in object literal, is treates as number, i.e. can't assign it to a type only covered by the string index signature

```typescript
interface Person {
    [index: string]: string | boolean;
    [index: number]: boolean
}

const p: Person = { name: "Peter", employed: true, "42": "foobar" }; // Property '"42"' is incompatible with index signature.
const a = p[1]; // boolean
const b = p["1"]; // string | boolean
```

- any additional properties must be a subtype of the string index signature

```typescript
interface Person {
    [index: string]: string;
    name: string;
    age: number; // Property 'age' of type 'number' is not assignable to string index type 'string'.(2411)
}

const p: Person = { name: "Peter", age: 42, employer: "Ford" };
```

- beware: the indices covered by a string index signature and numeric index signature are _disjoint_ sets, numeric indices are not treated as subset of string indices, only the _type_ of the numeric indices must be a subtype of the type of string indices because `obj[100]` is `obj["100"]`, but the types of the indices themselves remain disjoint sets, i.e. an array can't have a string index signature but just a numeric index signature ❗️

```typescript
interface StringArray {
    [index: number]: boolean;
    [key: string]: boolean | string;
}

let myArray: StringArray = [true, false] as any; // needs any since string[] is not treated as subtype of object
myArray[2] = true;
myArray.something = "Hello World!";
```

- can make index signature readonly by prepending `readonly`

Commit message:

fix: Formatting in all files, rewording. improvement: In Introduction add example to check 'never' path in control flow analysis, add dotJS source. In Basic Types reorder 'Literal types' and 'Enums'. Rewrite Type operators, move over Indexed type access operator and index type query oeprator, add Mapped types. Rewrite Generic Types, move over Built-in generic types. refactor: Reorder files. Remove Modules. Move configuration file to Build process.

Languages/TypeScript/3. Type aliases and interfaces.md, after:

# Type Aliases and Interfaces

[TOC]



## Type Aliases

- alias for a type
- can be reused instead of typing out literal type
- alias names must be unique

```typescript
// variable type alias
type ID = number | string;

// object type alias
type Person = {
  firstName: string,
  lastName: string,
  age: number
};

// function type alias
type NumToString = (num: number) => string;
```

- aliases don't create new types, are just names for existing ones, i.e. can have two aliases for same type ❗️

```typescript
type s1 = string;
type s2 = string;

const p1: s1 = "Hello";
const p2: s2 = p1; // legal, since s1, s2 are aliasing the identical type string
```

- type aliases for object types can be extended using intersection types

```typescript
type Person = {
    name: string;
    age: number;
}

type Work = {
    profession: string;
}

type Adult = Person & Work;

const person1: Adult = {age: 42, name: "Peter", profession: "Teacher"};
```



## Interfaces

- alias for an _object_ type
- order of object properties doesn't matter
- use semicolons instead of colons, and no equal sign ❗️

```typescript
// object interface
interface Person {
  firstName: string;
  lastName: string;
  age: number;
  sayHi: (this: Person) => string; // bind this context to Person object
};
  
const person1: Person = {
  age: 42,
  firstName: "Peter",
  lastName: "Griffin",
  sayHi: function() {return "Hi, my name is" + this.firstName}
};

// function expression interface
interface NumToString {
  (num: number): string
}

const sayAge: NumToString = function(age: number) {
    return `Hello, I am ${age} years old.`;
}
```

- interfaces can extend other interfaces using the `extend` keyword, conciser syntax than intersection type with type aliases, multiple interfaces can be specified using comma

```typescript
interface Person {
    name: string;
    age: number;
}

interface Adult extends Person {
    profession: string;
}

const person1: Adult = {age: 42, name: "Peter", profession: "Teacher"};
```

- can even extend classes, class members are used as if they had been declared in interface without implementation
- interfaces allow for declaration merging, redeclaration of same interface, e.g. used for monkey-patching existing libraries

```typescript
interface Person {
    name: string;
    age: number;
}

interface Person {
    profession: string;
}

const person1: Person = {age: 42, name: "Peter", profession: "Teacher"};
```

- differences between interface and type alias for object type, see [StackOverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/37233735/typescript-interfaces-vs-types/52682220#52682220)

    | point | interface | type alias |
    | ----- | --------- | ---------- |
    | extension | `extends`, declaration merging | intersection type |
    | error messages | better | - |

- for object types, interfaces are almost like type aliases, except they can be extended by redeclaration ("declaration merging") or the `extend` keyword instead of the intersection type, also they have clearer error messages, prefer interfaces over type aliases, see [StackOverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/37233735/typescript-interfaces-vs-types/52682220#52682220)



## Index Signatures

- specify type of object properties according to how they're indexed
- can use to type arbitrarily many properties in object literal, type alias, interface, class, etc.
- can be string or number, because JS allows indices to be string or number, e.g. `obj["somestr"]` and `obj[42]`
- but number index signature must be subtype of string index signature, since JS converts numeric indices to strings, e.g. `obj[100]` is actually just `obj["100"]` ❗️

```typescript
interface Person {
    [index: string]: string;
}

const p: Person = { name: "Peter", surname: "Wikler", age: 42 }; // Type 'number' is not assignable to type 'string'.(2322)
```

```typescript
interface Person {
    [index: string]: string | boolean;
    [index: number]: boolean
}

const p: Person = { name: "Peter", employed: true, "42": false };
const a = p[42]; // boolean
const b = p["42"]; // string | boolean
```

- beware: property names that contain a number written as string are also treated according to the numeric index signature, i.e. can't assign it to a type only covered by the string index signature

```typescript
interface Person {
    [index: string]: string | boolean;
    [index: number]: boolean
}

const p: Person = { name: "Peter", employed: true, "42": "foobar" }; // Property '"42"' is incompatible with index signature.
const a = p[1]; // boolean
const b = p["1"]; // string | boolean
```

- any additional properties must be a subtype of the string index signature

```typescript
interface Person {
    [index: string]: string;
    name: string;
    age: number; // Property 'age' of type 'number' is not assignable to string index type 'string'.(2411)
}

const p: Person = { name: "Peter", age: 42, employer: "Ford" };
```

- beware: the indices covered by a string index signature and numeric index signature are _disjoint_ sets, numeric indices are not treated as subset of string indices, only the _type_ of the numeric indices must be a subtype of the type of string indices because `obj[100]` is `obj["100"]`, but the types of the indices themselves remain disjoint sets, i.e. an array can't have a string index signature but just a numeric index signature ❗️

```typescript
interface StringArray {
    [index: number]: boolean;
    [key: string]: boolean | string;
}

let myArray: StringArray = [true, false] as any; // needs any since string[] is not treated as subtype of object
myArray[2] = true;
myArray.something = "Hello World!";
```

- can make index signature readonly by prepending `readonly`
