Languages/TypeScript/5. Type constructors.md, before:

# Type constructors

[TOC]



## Introduction

- create custom types out of basic types



## Union types

- intersect multiple types
- values may be of any one of those types

```typescript
function greet(id: number | string) {
  console.log("Hello, agent " + id);
}

greet(7);
greet("Bond");
```

- only the _intersection_ of all the types' properties are available, e.g. `slice()` for type `<type>[] | string` but not `toUpperCase()`

```typescript
interface Bird {
  name: string;
  wingspan: number;
}

interface Fish {
  name: string;
  fins: number;
}

declare function getPet(): Bird | Fish

let pet = getPet();
pet.name;
pet.wingspan; // Property 'wingspan' does not exist on type 'Fish'.(2339)
```



## Intersection types

- combine multiple types
- values must be of all of those types

```typescript
function sayAge(person: {name: string} & {age: number}) {
  console.log(`${person.name} is ${person.age} years old.`);
}

sayAge({name: "Peter", age: 42});
sayAge({name: "Peter"}); // Property 'age' is missing in type '{ name: string; }' but required in type '{ age: number; }'.(2345)
```

- the union of all the types' properties are available, e.g. `toUpperCase()` and `push()` for type `<type>[] & string`
- for basic types the intersection is always empty since they are disjoint sets of values, needs to use with custom types, i.e. `number & string` is always `never`
- can use to extend existing types  
  beware: if existing type is one of the basic types needs to use type assertion on declaration to prevent the more narrow basic type to be inferred, e.g. array

```typescript
type NamedArray = number[] & {name: string};

const arr = [1, 2, 3] as NamedArray;
arr.name = "Peter";

const brr = [4, 5, 6];
brr.name = "Lisa"; // Property 'name' does not exist on type 'number[]'.(2339)
```



## Optional types

- union of type with `undefined`, e.g. `<type> | undefined`
- used to make variable or property optional
- append `?` after variable or property name
- e.g. in function argument, type alias, interface

Commit message:

fix: In Basic Types clarify disciminated union, move note about type inference for variable declarations into 'Implicit typing' in Introduction. In Type operators add note about index signature in mapped types. Minor grammar fixes.

Languages/TypeScript/5. Type constructors.md, after:

# Type constructors

[TOC]



## Introduction

- create custom types out of basic types



## Union types

- intersect multiple types
- values may be of any one of those types

```typescript
function greet(id: number | string) {
  console.log("Hello, agent " + id);
}

greet(7);
greet("Bond");
```

- only the _intersection_ of all the types' properties are available, e.g. `slice()` for type `<type>[] | string` but not `toUpperCase()`

```typescript
interface Bird {
  name: string;
  wingspan: number;
}

interface Fish {
  name: string;
  fins: number;
}

declare function getPet(): Bird | Fish

let pet = getPet();
pet.name;
pet.wingspan; // Property 'wingspan' does not exist on type 'Fish'.(2339)
```



## Intersection types

- combine multiple types
- values must be of all of those types

```typescript
function sayAge(person: {name: string} & {age: number}) {
  console.log(`${person.name} is ${person.age} years old.`);
}

sayAge({name: "Peter", age: 42});
sayAge({name: "Peter"}); // Property 'age' is missing in type '{ name: string; }' but required in type '{ age: number; }'.(2345)
```

- the union of all the types' properties are available, e.g. `toUpperCase()` and `push()` for type `<type>[] & string`
- for basic types the intersection is always empty since they are disjoint sets of values, needs to use with custom types, i.e. `number & string` is always `never`
- can use to extend existing types
- beware: if existing type is one of the basic types needs to use type assertion on declaration to prevent the more narrow basic type to be inferred, e.g. array ❗️

```typescript
type NamedArray = number[] & {name: string};

const arr = [1, 2, 3] as NamedArray;
arr.name = "Peter";

const brr = [4, 5, 6];
brr.name = "Lisa"; // Property 'name' does not exist on type 'number[]'.(2339)
```

- beware: intersection of two object types includes everything, e.g. call signatures, index signatures, etc. Use spread syntax to use only non-method properties ❗️


## Optional types

- union of type with `undefined`, e.g. `<type> | undefined`
- used to make variable or property optional
- append `?` after variable or property name
- e.g. in function argument, type alias, interface
