Languages/TypeScript/6. Generic types.md, before:

# Generic Types

[TOC]



## Introduction

- type variables that are used in place of specific types
- used to specify relationship between types without needing to know actual types
- actual types are specified later in call, either inferred or explicitly
- type variables / parameters are in angle brackets after name of function, class, type alias, interface, etc.
- multiple type variables / parameters can be separated by commas
- by convention, type variable names are single uppercase letters, e.g. `T`
- use instead of `any` type to make expression again type safe
- can't do operations that are not valid for any type, needs to first narrow type using type guards, also check if is non-nullable ❗️

```typescript
// function with generic
function echo<T>(input: T): T {
  return input;
}

const a = echo<number>(42); // number, explicit type parameter
const b = echo(42); // number, inferred type parameter
const c = echo<string>("Hello World"); // string, explicit type parameter
const d = echo("Hello World"); // string, inferred type parameter

// function type with generic
const identity: <U>(input: U) => U = echo;
```

```typescript
// class with generic
class Person<T> {
  constructor(public prop: T) {}
}

const a = new Person("Peter");
a.prop; // string
const b = new Person(42);
b.prop; // number
```

```typescript
// type aliase with generic
type Person<T> = {
  x: T,
  y: T,
};

const a: Person<number> = {x: 42, y: 21};
const b: Person<string> = {x: "foo", y: 21}; // Type 'number' is not assignable to type 'string'.(2322)
```

```typescript
// interface with generic
interface Person<T> {
  x: T,
  y: T,
}

const a: Person<boolean> = {x: true, y: false};
const b: Person<string> = {x: 42, y: "bar"}; // Type 'number' is not assignable to type 'string'.(2322)
```

```typescript
// standalone version of Array.prototype.map()
function map<T, R>(arr: T[], func: (item: T) => R): R[] {
  return arr.map(func);
}

map(["Hello", "World"], n => n * 2);
// TS2362: The left-hand side of an arithmetic operation must be of type 'any', 'number', 'bigint' or an enum type.
```

- in function or class a call can often omit type parameters since types are inferred from arguments, not in type alias or interface though
- always use as few type variables as possible to avoid complexity ❗️
- don't use generics if basic types can be used, i.e. if type variable only appears in one location ❗️
- can't use generic type parameter with static properties of a class ❗️ 
- currently does not support control-flow type narrowing on type variables ([StackOverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/60475431/type-is-not-assignable-to-conditional-type-for-generic))

```typescript
type Return<T> = T extends string ? number : T extends number ? string : never;

function typeSwitch<T extends string | number>(x: T):  Return<T>{
  if (typeof x == "string") {
    return 42; // Type '42' is not assignable to type 'Return<T>'.(2322)
  } else if (typeof x == "number") {
    return "Hello World!"; // Type '"Hello World!"' is not assignable to type 'Return<T>'.(2322)
  }
  throw new Error("Invalid input"); // needed because TS return analysis doesn't currently factor in complete control flow analysis
}

const x = typeSwitch("qwerty"); // number
```

- recursion cut-off level when comparing two identical recursive types is 5

```typescript
type Foo<T> = {
  item: T
  next: Foo<Foo<T>>;
}

type Bar<T> = {
  item: T
  next: Bar<Bar<T>>;
}
```

- members of a union type are distributed over generic

```typescript
type Named = { name: string };

type filterNamed<T> = T extends Named ? T : never;

type Person = {
    name: string;
}

type Animal = {
    name: string;
}

type Car = {
    speed: number;
}

type NamedTypes = filterNamed<Person | Animal | Car>;
             // = filterNamed<Person> | filterNamed<Animal> | filterNamed<Car>;
             // = Person | Animal | never
             // = Person | Animal
```



## Constraints

- limit a generic to certain subset of types
- use the `extends` keyword after type variable
- `extends` means left type is assignable to right type, types are compatible, not necessarily equal ❗️
- keep it as simple as possible, do not over-complicate constraints ❗️

```typescript
// could have as well used a separate type or interface for { length: number; }.
function getLength<T extends { length: number }>(arg: T): number {
  return arg.length;
}

getLength([1, 2, 3]);
getLength("alice");
getLength(1000); // Argument of type '1000' is not assignable to parameter of type '{ length: number; }'.(2345)
```

```typescript
interface Named {
  name: string;
}

function sortByName<T extends Named>(nameArray: T[]): T[] {
  nameArray.forEach(item => { console.log(item.name) }); // can access properties of Named
  return nameArray;
}

const arr = [
  { name: "Peter", age: 42, alive: true },
  { name: "Susan", age: 99, alive: false },
  { name: "Fox", age: 21, alive: true }
]; // compatible with type Named[]

const sortedArr = sortByName(arr); // { name: string; age: number; alive: boolean; }[]
```

- can constrain type parameter by another type parameter

```typescript
function getProperty<T, K extends keyof T>(obj: T, key: K) {
  return obj[key];
}

let x = { a: 1, b: 2, c: 3, d: 4 };

getProperty(x, "a");
getProperty(x, "f"); // Argument of type '"f"' is not assignable to parameter of type '"a" | "b" | "c" | "d"'.(2345)
```



## Inferred type

- ???

```typescript
type ReturnTypeOrType<T> = T extends (...args: any[]) => infer R ? R : T;

function sum(...args: number[]): number {
    return args.reduce((acc, cur) => acc + cur, 0);
}

type a = ReturnTypeOrType<typeof sum>; // number
type b = ReturnTypeOrType<{ name: string }>; // { name: string }
```



## Built-in generic types

- `Partial<T>`: Make all properties in T optional
- `Required<T>`: Make all properties in T required
- `Readonly<T>`: Make all properties in T readonly
- `Pick<T, K>`: From T, pick a set of properties whose keys are in the union K
- `Record<K, T>`: Construct a type with a set of properties K of type T
- `Exclude<T, U>`: Exclude from T those types that are assignable to U
- `Extract<T, U>`: Extract from T those types that are assignable to U
- `Omit<T, K>`: Construct a type with the properties of T except for those in type K
- `NonNullable<T>`: Exclude null and undefined from T
- `Parameters<T>`: Obtain the parameters of a function type in a tuple
- `ConstructorParameters<T>`: Obtain the parameters of a constructor function type in a tuple
- `ReturnType<T>`: Obtain the return type of a function type, argument is function type not function itself, i.e. `typeof f` not just `f`
- `InstanceType<T>`: Obtain the return type of a constructor function type
- `ThisType<T>`: Marker for contextual 'this' type
- `ThisParameterType<T>`: Extracts the type of the 'this' parameter of a function type, needs `strictFunctionTypes` flag
- `OmitThisParameter<T>`: Removes the 'this' parameter from a function type, needs `strictFunctionTypes` flag

Commit message:

fix: In Basic Types clarify disciminated union, move note about type inference for variable declarations into 'Implicit typing' in Introduction. In Type operators add note about index signature in mapped types. Minor grammar fixes.

Languages/TypeScript/6. Generic types.md, after:

# Generic Types

[TOC]



## Introduction

- type variables that are used in place of specific types
- used to specify relationship between types without needing to know actual types
- actual types are specified later in call, either inferred or explicitly
- type variables / parameters are in angle brackets after name of function, class, type alias, interface, etc.
- multiple type variables / parameters can be separated by commas
- by convention, type variable names are single uppercase letters, e.g. `T`
- use instead of `any` type to make expression again type safe
- can't do operations that are not valid for any type, needs to first narrow type using type guards, also check if is non-nullable ❗️

```typescript
// function with generic
function echo<T>(input: T): T {
  return input;
}

const a = echo<number>(42); // number, explicit type parameter
const b = echo(42); // number, inferred type parameter
const c = echo<string>("Hello World"); // string, explicit type parameter
const d = echo("Hello World"); // string, inferred type parameter

// function type with generic
const identity: <U>(input: U) => U = echo;
```

```typescript
// class with generic
class Person<T> {
  constructor(public prop: T) {}
}

const a = new Person("Peter");
a.prop; // string
const b = new Person(42);
b.prop; // number
```

```typescript
// type aliase with generic
type Person<T> = {
  x: T,
  y: T,
};

const a: Person<number> = {x: 42, y: 21};
const b: Person<string> = {x: "foo", y: 21}; // Type 'number' is not assignable to type 'string'.(2322)
```

```typescript
// interface with generic
interface Person<T> {
  x: T,
  y: T,
}

const a: Person<boolean> = {x: true, y: false};
const b: Person<string> = {x: 42, y: "bar"}; // Type 'number' is not assignable to type 'string'.(2322)
```

```typescript
// standalone version of Array.prototype.map()
function map<T, R>(arr: T[], func: (item: T) => R): R[] {
  return arr.map(func);
}

map(["Hello", "World"], n => n * 2);
// TS2362: The left-hand side of an arithmetic operation must be of type 'any', 'number', 'bigint' or an enum type.
```

- can specify default type for type parameters, required type parameters must come first
- in function or class a call can often omit type parameters since types are inferred from arguments, not in type alias or interface though
- always use as few type variables as possible to avoid complexity ❗️
- don't use generics if basic types can be used, i.e. if type variable only appears in one location ❗️
- can't use generic type parameter with static properties of a class ❗️ 
- currently does not support control-flow type narrowing on type variables ([StackOverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/60475431/type-is-not-assignable-to-conditional-type-for-generic))

```typescript
type Return<T> = T extends string ? number : T extends number ? string : never;

function typeSwitch<T extends string | number>(x: T):  Return<T>{
  if (typeof x == "string") {
    return 42; // Type '42' is not assignable to type 'Return<T>'.(2322)
  } else if (typeof x == "number") {
    return "Hello World!"; // Type '"Hello World!"' is not assignable to type 'Return<T>'.(2322)
  }
  throw new Error("Invalid input"); // needed because TS return analysis doesn't currently factor in complete control flow analysis
}

const x = typeSwitch("qwerty"); // number
```

- recursion cut-off level when comparing two identical recursive types is 5

```typescript
type Foo<T> = {
  item: T
  next: Foo<Foo<T>>;
}

type Bar<T> = {
  item: T
  next: Bar<Bar<T>>;
}
```

- members of a union type are distributed over generic

```typescript
type Named = { name: string };

type filterNamed<T> = T extends Named ? T : never;

type Person = {
    name: string;
}

type Animal = {
    name: string;
}

type Car = {
    speed: number;
}

type NamedTypes = filterNamed<Person | Animal | Car>;
             // = filterNamed<Person> | filterNamed<Animal> | filterNamed<Car>;
             // = Person | Animal | never
             // = Person | Animal
```



## Constraints

- limit a generic to certain subset of types
- use the `extends` keyword after type variable
- `extends` means left type is assignable to right type, types are compatible, not necessarily equal ❗️
- keep it as simple as possible, do not over-complicate constraints ❗️

```typescript
// could have as well used a separate type or interface for { length: number; }.
function getLength<T extends { length: number }>(arg: T): number {
  return arg.length;
}

getLength([1, 2, 3]);
getLength("alice");
getLength(1000); // Argument of type '1000' is not assignable to parameter of type '{ length: number; }'.(2345)
```

```typescript
interface Named {
  name: string;
}

function sortByName<T extends Named>(nameArray: T[]): T[] {
  nameArray.forEach(item => { console.log(item.name) }); // can access properties of Named
  return nameArray;
}

const arr = [
  { name: "Peter", age: 42, alive: true },
  { name: "Susan", age: 99, alive: false },
  { name: "Fox", age: 21, alive: true }
]; // compatible with type Named[]

const sortedArr = sortByName(arr); // { name: string; age: number; alive: boolean; }[]
```

- can constrain type parameter by another type parameter

```typescript
function getProperty<T, K extends keyof T>(obj: T, key: K) {
  return obj[key];
}

let x = { a: 1, b: 2, c: 3, d: 4 };

getProperty(x, "a");
getProperty(x, "f"); // Argument of type '"f"' is not assignable to parameter of type '"a" | "b" | "c" | "d"'.(2345)
```



## Inferred type

- ???

```typescript
type ReturnTypeOrType<T> = T extends (...args: any[]) => infer R ? R : T;

function sum(...args: number[]): number {
    return args.reduce((acc, cur) => acc + cur, 0);
}

type a = ReturnTypeOrType<typeof sum>; // number
type b = ReturnTypeOrType<{ name: string }>; // { name: string }
```



## Built-in generic types

- `Partial<T>`: Make all properties in T optional
- `Required<T>`: Make all properties in T required
- `Readonly<T>`: Make all properties in T readonly
- `Pick<T, K>`: From T, pick a set of properties whose keys are in the union K
- `Record<K, T>`: Construct a type with a set of properties K of type T
- `Exclude<T, U>`: Exclude from T those types that are assignable to U
- `Extract<T, U>`: Extract from T those types that are assignable to U
- `Omit<T, K>`: Construct a type with the properties of T except for those in type K
- `NonNullable<T>`: Exclude null and undefined from T
- `Parameters<T>`: Obtain the parameters of a function type in a tuple
- `ConstructorParameters<T>`: Obtain the parameters of a constructor function type in a tuple
- `ReturnType<T>`: Obtain the return type of a function type, argument is function type not function itself, i.e. `typeof f` not just `f`
- `InstanceType<T>`: Obtain the return type of a constructor function type
- `ThisType<T>`: Marker for contextual 'this' type
- `ThisParameterType<T>`: Extracts the type of the 'this' parameter of a function type, needs `strictFunctionTypes` flag
- `OmitThisParameter<T>`: Removes the 'this' parameter from a function type, needs `strictFunctionTypes` flag
