Developer Tools/Programming Principles.md, before:

# Motivation

[TOC]



## Introduction

- "Programs must communicate clearly to people not the computer." - Douglas Crockford
- "Whenever there is a divergence between what your brain thinks is happening and what is actually happening in the computer, that's where bugs enter the code." - Kyle Simpson



## Code style

- "We don't spend our time typing, that's not where our time goes. It's looking into the abyss, that's where our time goes." - Douglas Crockford
- "Don't be clever just to save a couple of characters. Be more explicit about it in the places where explicitness is more communicative.` - Kyle Simpson
- use comments to explain the _why_ not the _what_, sometimes the _how_ if it's too confusing, because can see _what_ is done but doesn't know _why_ it's done



## Version identifier

- Use [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org/), for discussion see [Joel Parker Henderson - Versioning](https://github.com/joelparkerhenderson/versioning)
- "In Web Development the Hamster Wheel of Backwards Incompatibility has become more of a Hamster Centrifuge." -  Steve Losh
- "Every backwards-incompatible change costs the world an amount of time." - Steve Losh on [Volatile Software](https://stevelosh.com/blog/2012/04/volatile-software/)



## Commit messages

- Use [Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/)



## DOM element class names

- Use [BEM](http://getbem.com/naming) naming convention

Commit message:

feat: in Programming principles add quotes from Joel Parker Henderson and Rich Harris.

Developer Tools/Programming Principles.md, after:

# Motivation

[TOC]



## Introduction

- "Programs must communicate clearly to people not the computer." - Douglas Crockford
- "Any fool can write programs that a computer can understand. Good programers write programs that humans can understand." - Martin Fowler
- "Whenever there is a divergence between what your brain thinks is happening and what is actually happening in the computer, that's where bugs enter the code." - Kyle Simpson

- "If you made what you though was progress, it is okay to abandon that, if it turns out to be in the wrong place" - [Rich Harris](https://youtu.be/BzX4aTRPzno?t=710)

## Code style

- "We don't spend our time typing, that's not where our time goes. It's looking into the abyss, that's where our time goes." - Douglas Crockford
- "Don't be clever just to save a couple of characters. Be more explicit about it in the places where explicitness is more communicative.` - Kyle Simpson
- use comments to explain the _why_ not the _what_, sometimes the _how_ if it's too confusing, because can see _what_ is done but doesn't know _why_ it's done



## Version identifier

- Use [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org/), deterministic version pinning, separate commit to update dependencies
- "Version numbers signal the intent of the release, but don’t guarantee anything." - [Joel Parker Henderson - Versioning](https://github.com/joelparkerhenderson/versioning)
- "Semver is like traffic lights. Cars may run them, but it doesn't mean they are useless." - [Joel Parker Henderson - Versioning](https://github.com/joelparkerhenderson/versioning)
- "In Web Development the Hamster Wheel of Backwards Incompatibility has become more of a Hamster Centrifuge." -  Steve Losh
- "Every backwards-incompatible change costs the world an amount of time." - Steve Losh on [Volatile Software](https://stevelosh.com/blog/2012/04/volatile-software/)



## Commit messages

- Use [Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/)



## DOM element class names

- Use [BEM](http://getbem.com/naming) naming convention
