# Logging

<!-- Todo: rework decription of each logging level -->



## Introduction

- recording of events in program
- used for retrospective investigation of past instance, e.g. diagnose problem, gather statistics, etc.
- beware: not used for investigation of current instance, can just use debugger ❗️
- often used in production systems where can only access logs afterwards, e.g. client, cloud, etc.
- beware: don't confuse log with user interface, one is for programmer other is for user, e.g. console in CLI program is user interface ⚠️
- use automatic log reporting, at least for `WARN` logging level and higher
- beware: needs to find right amount of logging, otherwise pollutes source code, buries interesting events in noise, takes up disk space, etc. ❗️



## Logging levels

- categories of logs
- according to relative severity of event
- result in different granularities
- amount and definition of levels depends on individual program
- beware: finitely many levels limits exactness, always has some noise because of non-precise distinction ❗️

### 1. `TRACE`

- logs flow of execution
- allows to follow exact code path
- e.g. before and after user input, function call, etc.

### 2. `DEBUG`

- logs flow of data
- allows to follow path of data
- e.g. user input, function parameter values, function return value, etc.

### 3. `INFO`

- logs milestones of program
- allows to follow major steps
- e.g. program start / stop, connection established, etc.

### 4. `WARN`

<!-- todo: refrase better, prediction of errors... -->
- logs potential problems
- allows to predict errors
- e.g. invalid user input, low disk space, etc.

### 5. `ERROR`

- logs recoverable errors
- fatal to operation but not program
- program continues execution, doen't exit
- e.g. connection failure with try again, etc.
- show error message to user before resuming

### 6. `CRITICAL`

- logs unrecoverable errors
- fatal to program (and hence operation)
- program stops execution, exits
- e.g. connection failure without try again, etc.
- show error message to user before exiting



## Resources

- [Toddy Mladenov - Log Levels And How To Properly Use Them: Part 1 – Common Log Levels](https://crimsonpinnacle.com/2020/08/05/log-levels-and-how-to-properly-use-them-part-1-common-log-levels/)
- [Toddy Mladenov - Log Levels And How To Properly Use Them: Part 2 – Logging Example](https://crimsonpinnacle.com/2020/08/21/log-levels-and-how-to-properly-use-them-part-2-logging-example/)