Front-End Web Development/JavaScript Extensions/TypeScript/1. Introduction.md, before:

# Introduction

[TOC]

## TypeScript

- preprocessor, statically typed superset of JS that compiles to plain JS
- write JS as usual, add types
- (also works as a transpiler for older ES versions, but better use only for types and use Babel for transpilation)
- types allow for powerful error checking, e.g. control flow, function arguments, available methods, etc.
- error check layer is just during development, type declaration get deleted on compilation to JS
- security is gone as soon as compiled to JS, e.g. `readonly` properties, `private` class members ⚠️
- type checking makes sense anyways only during development, on client can not do anything
- TS doesn't prevent compilation if there is a type related error, since is still valid JS
- implements new JS features when reach Stage 3
- no performance overhead since it all "compiles away"
- static type-checking
- give variables, functions, etc. strict types, restrict values, enable more reasoning about behavior
- types are narrowed down based on control flow, type guards, assignments, etc.
- goes backwards and makes dynamically typed JS to statically typed TS, but implicit inference hides a lot of typing
- but statically typed means engine can run it faster because of optimisations
- TS has very powerful types, whole programming language around types, can combine conditionally, everything is a type

Commit message:

In JS Core add mention about !! shorthand, add more version annotations. Clean whitespace of Intro of JS Client-Side. Write on Typescript.

Front-End Web Development/JavaScript Extensions/TypeScript/1. Introduction.md, after:

# Introduction

[TOC]

<!-- ToDo: Clean up --> 

## TypeScript

- statically typed superset of JS that compiles to plain JS
- write JS as usual, add types
- (also works as a transpiler for older ES versions, but better use only for types and use Babel for transpilation)
- types allow for powerful error checking, e.g. control flow, function arguments, available methods, etc.
- error check layer is just during development, type declaration get deleted on compilation to JS
- security is gone as soon as compiled to JS, e.g. `readonly` properties, `private` class members ⚠️
- type checking makes sense anyways only during development, on client can not do anything
- TS doesn't prevent compilation if there is a type related error, since is still valid JS
- implements new JS features when reach Stage 3
- zero cost: no performance overhead since it all "compiles away", as if you had written JS in the first place, but without bugs ;)
- static type-checking
- give variables, functions, etc. strict types, restrict values, enable more reasoning about behavior
- types are narrowed down based on control flow, type guards, assignments, etc.
- goes backwards and makes dynamically typed JS to statically typed TS, but implicit inference hides a lot of typing
- but statically typed means engine can run it faster because of optimisations
- TS has very powerful types, whole programming language around types, can combine conditionally, everything is a type
- takes just JS type system and writes it down so can reason about during development, static formalisation of JS's dynamic type system
- enforces the subset of JS that makes sense, not the one that is syntactically valid
- TS doesn't inject anything in the code, compiles to plain JS
- adds static types
- powerful tooling with error checking right when writing code, not only later when trying to run it, no need to implement unit tests for every line of code
- can use types to build documentation, no need to annotate just for documentation, avoids extra layer of complexity and potential errors
- any professional JavaScript development needs TypeScript, otherwise would need to write unit tests for every single line of code, can not sleep at night
- nobody forces you to strongly type everything, no binary choice between yes and no, can dial it up gradually, the more types the more checking
- primary purpose of types is to enable tooling during development, e.g. statement completion, safe refactoring, go-to-definition etc.
make sleep well at night

## Resources

- [The New TypeScript Handbook](https://github.com/microsoft/TypeScript-New-Handbook)
- [Anders Hejlsberg](https://channel9.msdn.com/Events/Speakers/Anders-Hejlsberg)
