Front-End Web Development/JavaScript Extensions/TypeScript/2. Basic Types.md, before:

# Types

[TOC]

## Introduction

- types are sets of values, set theory
- unit types: every value is a type, e.g. there is a type "`42`" with only possible value `42`
- basic types: common sets of unit types, e.g. `number`, `string`
- can assign type to variables, function parameters, function return type, object properties, etc.
- uses colon after entity name, like in classical languages

```typescript
const age: number = 42;

function sayAge(age: number): string {
    return `Hello, I am ${age} years old.`;
}
```

- type gets fixed once set, can't assign other type later like in JS, otherwise typing wouldn't make any sense since couldn't be used to reason about code

## Basic Types

| types | description |
| ----- | ----------- |
| `string` | string values (* and `null` and `undefined`) |
| `number` | number values (* and `null` and `undefined`) |
| `bigint` | bigint values (* and `null` and `undefined`) |
| `boolean` | boolean values (* and `null` and `undefined`) |
| `symbol` | symbol values (* and `null` and `undefined`) |
| `object` | object values (* and `null` and `undefined`) |
| `function` | symbol values (* and `null` and `undefined`) |
| `undefined` | `undefined` (* and `null`) |
| `null` | `null` (* and `undefined`) |
| `any` | any value, no type checking, "unsafe" |
| `unknown` | any value, restrictive type checking |
| `never`| non-existent value, subtype of every other type, e.g. if function throws error, never returns, or if-testing covered every possible type |
| `void` | no value, subtype of `undefined` (* and `null`), e.g. function that implicitly returns undefined |
| `[<type>, ..., <type>]` | tuple of different types, known length and order, items of different types |
| `<type>[]` | array of `<type>`, variable length and order, items of same type |
| `{key1: <type>, ..., keyN: <type>}` | object type, known length |
| `(arg1: <type>, ..., argN: <type>) => <type>` | function type |

- by default `null` and `undefined` are subtypes of every other type, e.g. can assign `undefined` to `number`, disable using `strictNullChecks` flag (disables *)
- ??? always use literal types (lowercase), constructor ones are special built-in types (uppercase), e.g. `object` not `Object` ???
- ??? can also use constructor names instead, e.g. `Array<type>`, but not often used ???
- types need to be written after object or array destructuring

```typescript
// object
const o = {a: "foo", b: 12, c: "bar"};
const { a, b }: { a: string, b: number } = o;

// tuple
const [name, age]: [string, number] = ["Peter", 42];
```

## Object type

- types of object properties, shape of object
- uses object literal syntax, e.g. `{ a: string, b: number }`
- property separator can be comma or colon ❗️

```typescript
const o: { a: string, b: number } = {a: "foo", b: 12};
```

- used as type where ever an object is expected, e.g. when defining the arguments of a function
- don't confuse with object definition itself, doesn't need types since can be inferred from values
- can make object properties readonly by adding `readonly` before property name, effectively like const for object properties

```typescript
const o : { readonly a: string, b: number } = {a: "foo", b: 12};

o.b = 14;
o.a = "bar"; // TS2540: Cannot assign to 'a' because it is a read-only property.
```

- can make properties optional using `?` sign after name
- can make properties readonly using `readonly` before name

## Function type

- type of function, shape of a function
- uses arrow function syntax, e.g. `(a: number, b: number) => number`

```typescript
function map(items: any[], mappingFunction: (item: any) => any): any[] {
  /* ... */
}
```

- used as type where ever a function is expected, e.g. when defining the arguments of a function
- don't confuse with function definition itself (see 4. Functions), especially since syntax is equal to arrow function definition

## Tuple type

- like array but with known length and order
- can use spread operator with array to expand tuple to any length

```typescript
type args = [string, boolean, ...number[]];

const x: args = ["Hello", true];
const y: args = ["Hello", true, 42];
const z: args = ["Hello", true, 42, 21, 1, 2, 3];
```

## Enum type

- fixed length set of named constants
- used to create limited set of distinct cases, e.g. boolean type is an enum, can only select between `true` and `false`
- accesses constants like object properties
- like freezed object, where values don't matter except that they are distinct

```typescript
enum Direction {
  Up,
  Right,
  Down,
  Left
}

function walk(dir: Direction) {
  switch (dir) {
    case Direction.Up:
      return "Walking up...";
    case Direction.Right:
      return "Walking right...";
    case Direction.Down:
      return "Walking down...";
    case Direction.Left:
      return "Walking left...";
    default:
      throw new Error("Invalid input.")
  }
}

console.log(walk(Direction.Up)); // Walking up...
console.log(walk(Direction.Forward)); // Property 'Forward' does not exist on type 'typeof Direction'.(2339)
```

- constants have distinct values so can be compared and assigned
- by default values are ascending non-negative integers
- can access name using value and value using name
- implemented as object that has two opposite key-value pairs for each constant, i.e. name-value and value-name

```typescript
enum Direction {
  Up,
  Right,
  Down,
  Left
}

const dir = Direction.Up; // Direction.Up

console.log(dir); // 0
console.log(Direction[dir]); // Up
```

```javascript
// JS implementation
Direction = {
  0: "Up",
  1: "Right",
  2: "Down",
  3: "Left",
  Up: 0,
  Right: 1,
  Down: 2,
  Left: 3
}
```

- can specify different numbers as values, later values will ascend from that

```typescript
enum Direction {
  Up = 100,
  Right,
  Down,
  Left
}

const dir = Direction.Right; // Direction.Right

console.log(dir); // 101
console.log(Direction[dir]); // Right
```

- can specify strings as values, but looses ability to access name using value ⚠️

```typescript
enum Direction {
  Up = "u",
  Right = "r",
  Down = "d",
  Left = "l"
}

const dir = Direction.Right; // Direction.Right

console.log(dir); // r
console.log(Direction[dir]); // Up
```

```javascript
// JS implementation
Direction = {
  Up: "u",
  Right: "r",
  Down: "d",
  Left: "l"
}
```

- can make enums `const`, allow only constant enum expressions ???, are removed completely on compile time and replaced by values

## Literal types

- values of type boolean, string, number can themselves be used as types
- often useful to restrict input to certain values

```typescript
const x: "Hello World!" = "Hello World!";

function sayDirection(dir: 'up' | 'left' | 'down' | 'right'): void {
    console.log(`Please go ${dir}.`)
}
sayDirection('up');
```

- literal types are not inferred, instead more general type, i.e. `const x = 42` is inferred to be a `number` not a `42` ❗️
- can replace simple classical class syntax using just type aliases with literal types and type union

```typescript
function assertNever(object: never): never {
    throw new Error("Invalid object.")
}

type Shape =
    { kind: 'circle', radius: number } |
    { kind: 'rectangle', height: number, width: number } |
    { kind: 'square', size: number }

function getArea(shape: Shape): number {
    switch (shape.kind) {
        case "circle":
            return Math.PI * shape.radius ** 2;
        case "rectangle":
            return shape.height * shape.width;
        case "square":
            return shape.size ** 2;
    }
    assertNever(shape);
}

const myshape: Shape = { kind: "circle", radius: 10 };
const myarea = getArea(myshape);
```

## Type assertion

- treats entity as more or less specific version of same type
- often used when TS is too broad when inferring types, e.g. when selecting DOM nodes
- add type assertion either by post-pending entity with `as <type>` or pre-fixing it with `<type>`

```typescript
const myCanvas = document.getElementById("main_canvas"); // HTMLElement | null

const myCanvas = document.getElementById("main_canvas") as HTMLCanvasElement; // HTMLCanvasElement
const myCanvas = <HTMLCanvasElement>document.getElementById("main_canvas");
```

- be careful since can even change type completely ❗️

```typescript
const name = ("Peter" as any) as number; // number
```

### const assertion

- assert that type is immutable, takes narrowest possible type
- used because object and array types are taken to be mutable by default, i.e. types of object properties and array items are inferred as general types instead of literal types since values could be changed at any time
- use `as const` after object / array to convert to literal type
- is shorthand for creating a readonly object / array literal type

```typescript
const a = {
  kind: "circle",
  radius: 10
};

/*
{
  kind: string;
  radius: number;
}
*/

const b = {
  kind: "circle",
  radius: 10
} as const;

/*
{
  readonly kind: "circle";
  readonly radius: 10;
}
*/

const x = [1, 2, "world"]; // (string | number)[]
const y = [1, 2, "world"] as const; // readonly [1, 2, "world"];
const y: readonly [1, 2, "world"] = [1, 2, "world"];
```

- use `as <value>` after property value / array item to assert for a single property / array item

```typescript
function sayDirection(dir: 'up' | 'left' | 'down' | 'right'): void {
    console.log(`Please go ${dir}.`)
}

const myobj = {mydir: 'up'}; // property 'mydir' is of type 'string', not of type 'up'
sayDirection(myobj.mydir); // TS2345: Argument of type 'string' is not assignable to parameter of type '"up" | "left" | "down" | "right"'.
sayDirection(myobj.mydir as 'up'); // specify myobj.mydir as type 'up'

const myobj2 = {mydir: 'up' as 'up'}; // property 'mydir' is of type 'up'
sayDirection(myobj2.mydir);
```

### Non-null assertion operator

- asserts that value isn't `null` or `undefined`
- append `!` after variable
- use cautiously ⚠️

Commit message:

Add Programming Principles, Reactive Programming, HTTP.
In JavaScript Core move object illustrations, in most files minor fixes and additions. In Introduction add 'Global Object', add nullish coalescing and optional chaining operator, add polyfill, more resources. In Objects add 'Optional chaining', 'Property attributes', rewrite intro to Inheritance. In Functions rewrite intro to 'Closure', rewrite 'common problem explanation'. In Modules add introductory example and more resources.

In JavaScript Client-Side fix formatting of Introduction, BOM API, DOM API, Timeout API, minor fixes and rewording DOM API.

In TypeScript minor in most files minor additions and fixes. In Introduction add note on excess property checking. In Type aliases and interfaces add 'Index signatures'. In Classes add note on class expressions.

Front-End Web Development/JavaScript Extensions/TypeScript/2. Basic Types.md, after:

# Types

[TOC]

## Introduction

- types are sets of values, set theory
- unit types: every value is a type, e.g. there is a type "`42`" with only possible value `42`
- basic types: common sets of unit types, e.g. `number`, `string`
- can assign type to variables, function parameters, function return type, object properties, etc.
- uses colon after entity name, like in classical languages

```typescript
const age: number = 42;

function sayAge(age: number): string {
    return `Hello, I am ${age} years old.`;
}
```

- type gets fixed once set, can't assign other type later like in JS, otherwise typing wouldn't make any sense since couldn't be used to reason about code

## Basic Types

| types | description |
| ----- | ----------- |
| `string` | string values (* and `null` and `undefined`) |
| `number` | number values (* and `null` and `undefined`) |
| `bigint` | bigint values (* and `null` and `undefined`) |
| `boolean` | boolean values (* and `null` and `undefined`) |
| `symbol` | symbol values (* and `null` and `undefined`) |
| `object` | object values (* and `null` and `undefined`) |
| `function` | symbol values (* and `null` and `undefined`) |
| `undefined` | `undefined` (* and `null`) |
| `null` | `null` (* and `undefined`) |
| `any` | any value, no type checking, "unsafe" |
| `unknown` | any value, restrictive type checking |
| `never`| non-existent value, subtype of every other type, e.g. if function throws error, never returns, or if-testing covered every possible type |
| `void` | no value, subtype of `undefined` (* and `null`), e.g. function that implicitly returns undefined |
| `[<type>, ..., <type>]` | tuple of different types, known length and order, items of different types |
| `<type>[]` | array of `<type>`, variable length and order, items of same type |
| `{key1: <type>, ..., keyN: <type>}` | object type, known length |
| `(arg1: <type>, ..., argN: <type>) => <type>` | function type |

- by default `null` and `undefined` are subtypes of every other type, e.g. can assign `undefined` to `number`, disable using `strictNullChecks` flag (disables *)
- ??? always use literal types (lowercase), constructor ones are special built-in types (uppercase), e.g. `object` not `Object` ???
- ??? can also use constructor names instead, e.g. `Array<type>`, but not often used ???
- types need to be written after object or array destructuring

```typescript
// object
const o = {a: "foo", b: 12, c: "bar"};
const { a, b }: { a: string, b: number } = o;

// tuple
const [name, age]: [string, number] = ["Peter", 42];
```

- can make arrays and tuples readonly using `readonly` before name, disallows mutating its properties, effectively like const for object properties
- can make objects readonly by using a type alias / interface with `Readonly<T>` utility type, see [Type constructors](#)



## Object type

- types of object properties, shape of object
- uses object literal syntax, e.g. `{ a: string, b: number }`
- property separator can be comma or colon ❗️

```typescript
const o: { a: string, b: number } = {a: "foo", b: 12};
```

- used as type where ever an object is expected, e.g. when defining the arguments of a function
- don't confuse with object definition itself, doesn't need types since can be inferred from values
- can make object properties readonly using `readonly` before property name, effectively like const for object properties

```typescript
const o : { readonly a: string, b: number } = {a: "foo", b: 12};

o.b = 14;
o.a = "bar"; // TS2540: Cannot assign to 'a' because it is a read-only property.
```

- can make properties optional using `?` sign after name

## Function type

- type of function, shape of a function
- uses arrow function syntax, e.g. `(a: number, b: number) => number`

```typescript
function map(items: any[], mappingFunction: (item: any) => any): any[] {
  /* ... */
}
```

- used as type where ever a function is expected, e.g. when defining the arguments of a function
- don't confuse with function definition itself (see 4. Functions), especially since syntax is equal to arrow function definition

## Tuple type

- like array but with known length and order
- can use spread operator with array to expand tuple to any length

```typescript
type args = [string, boolean, ...number[]];

const x: args = ["Hello", true];
const y: args = ["Hello", true, 42];
const z: args = ["Hello", true, 42, 21, 1, 2, 3];
```

## Enum type

- fixed length set of named constants
- used to create limited set of distinct cases, e.g. boolean type is an enum, can only select between `true` and `false`
- accesses constants like object properties
- like freezed object, where values don't matter except that they are distinct

```typescript
enum Direction {
  Up,
  Right,
  Down,
  Left
}

function walk(dir: Direction) {
  switch (dir) {
    case Direction.Up:
      return "Walking up...";
    case Direction.Right:
      return "Walking right...";
    case Direction.Down:
      return "Walking down...";
    case Direction.Left:
      return "Walking left...";
    default:
      throw new Error("Invalid input.")
  }
}

console.log(walk(Direction.Up)); // Walking up...
console.log(walk(Direction.Forward)); // Property 'Forward' does not exist on type 'typeof Direction'.(2339)
```

- constants have distinct values so can be compared and assigned
- by default values are ascending non-negative integers
- can access name using value and value using name
- implemented as object that has two opposite key-value pairs for each constant, i.e. name-value and value-name

```typescript
enum Direction {
  Up,
  Right,
  Down,
  Left
}

const dir = Direction.Up; // Direction.Up

console.log(dir); // 0
console.log(Direction[dir]); // Up
```

```javascript
// JS implementation
Direction = {
  0: "Up",
  1: "Right",
  2: "Down",
  3: "Left",
  Up: 0,
  Right: 1,
  Down: 2,
  Left: 3
}
```

- can specify different numbers as values, later values will ascend from that

```typescript
enum Direction {
  Up = 100,
  Right,
  Down,
  Left
}

const dir = Direction.Right; // Direction.Right

console.log(dir); // 101
console.log(Direction[dir]); // Right
```

- can specify strings as values, but looses ability to access name using value ⚠️

```typescript
enum Direction {
  Up = "u",
  Right = "r",
  Down = "d",
  Left = "l"
}

const dir = Direction.Right; // Direction.Right

console.log(dir); // r
console.log(Direction[dir]); // Up
```

```javascript
// JS implementation
Direction = {
  Up: "u",
  Right: "r",
  Down: "d",
  Left: "l"
}
```

- can make enums `const`, allow only constant enum expressions ???, are removed completely on compile time and replaced by values

## Literal types

- values of type boolean, string, number can themselves be used as types
- often useful to restrict input to certain values

```typescript
const x: "Hello World!" = "Hello World!";

function sayDirection(dir: 'up' | 'left' | 'down' | 'right'): void {
    console.log(`Please go ${dir}.`)
}
sayDirection('up');
```

- literal types are not inferred, instead more general type, i.e. `const x = 42` is inferred to be a `number` not a `42` ❗️
- can replace simple classical class syntax using just type aliases with literal types and type union

```typescript
function assertNever(object: never): never {
    throw new Error("Invalid object.")
}

type Shape =
    { kind: 'circle', radius: number } |
    { kind: 'rectangle', height: number, width: number } |
    { kind: 'square', size: number }

function getArea(shape: Shape): number {
    switch (shape.kind) {
        case "circle":
            return Math.PI * shape.radius ** 2;
        case "rectangle":
            return shape.height * shape.width;
        case "square":
            return shape.size ** 2;
    }
    assertNever(shape);
}

const myshape: Shape = { kind: "circle", radius: 10 };
const myarea = getArea(myshape);
```

## Type assertion

- treats entity as a more or as a less specific version of same type
- often used when TS is too broad when inferring types, e.g. when selecting DOM nodes
- add type assertion either by post-pending entity with `as <type>` or pre-fixing it with `<type>`

```typescript
const myCanvas = document.getElementById("main_canvas"); // HTMLElement | null

const myCanvas = document.getElementById("main_canvas") as HTMLCanvasElement; // HTMLCanvasElement

const myCanvas = <HTMLCanvasElement>document.getElementById("main_canvas"); // HTMLCanvasElement
```

- be careful since can even change type completely ❗️

```typescript
const name = ("Peter" as any) as number; // number
```

### const assertion

- assert that type is immutable, takes narrowest possible type
- used because object and array types are taken to be mutable by default, i.e. types of object properties and array items are inferred as general types instead of literal types since values could be changed at any time
- use `as const` after object / array to convert to literal type
- is shorthand for creating a readonly object / array literal type

```typescript
const a = {
  kind: "circle",
  radius: 10
};

/*
{
  kind: string;
  radius: number;
}
*/

const b = {
  kind: "circle",
  radius: 10
} as const;

/*
{
  readonly kind: "circle";
  readonly radius: 10;
}
*/

const x = [1, 2, "world"]; // (string | number)[]
const y = [1, 2, "world"] as const; // readonly [1, 2, "world"];
const y: readonly [1, 2, "world"] = [1, 2, "world"];
```

- use `as <value>` after property value / array item to assert for a single property / array item

```typescript
function sayDirection(dir: 'up' | 'left' | 'down' | 'right'): void {
    console.log(`Please go ${dir}.`)
}

const myobj = {mydir: 'up'}; // property 'mydir' is of type 'string', not of type 'up'
sayDirection(myobj.mydir); // TS2345: Argument of type 'string' is not assignable to parameter of type '"up" | "left" | "down" | "right"'.
sayDirection(myobj.mydir as 'up'); // specify myobj.mydir as type 'up'

const myobj2 = {mydir: 'up' as 'up'}; // property 'mydir' is of type 'up'
sayDirection(myobj2.mydir);
```

### Non-null assertion operator

- asserts that value isn't `null` or `undefined`
- append `!` after variable
- use cautiously ⚠️
