Front-End Web Development/JavaScript Core/4. Arrays.md, before:

# Arrays

[TOC]



## Introduction

- ordered set of values, indexed collection
- just special objects: dynamic length property, constructor of an array is `Array`
- indexes are just integer property names, starting from `0`
- can use only bracket notation since integers are not valid identifiers
- values can be of any data type, arrays grow / shrink dynamically without bounds since just object



## Creating arrays

- array literal: `[element0, element1]`
- array constructor: `new Array(element0, element1)`, if argument single integer creates array with that length and all values `undefined`
- see `Array.of()` and `Array.from()` later



## Array elements

- doesn't need to assign to indexes in ascending order, can just assign to any property like object

```javascript
const arr = ["Hello", "World"];
arr[42] = "Illuminati";
```

- any non-integer element becomes a typical property name as string

```javascript
arr[3.5] = 1010; // creates property name "3.5"
console.log(arr["3.5"]) // 1010
```

- length property returns last index plus 1, computed internally

```javascript
console.log(arr.length); // 43
```

- increasing the length property does _not_ expand the array, just increases length property  
  beware: accessing non-existing elements returns `undefined` even though they do not exist at all, they are not just `undefined` ❗️
- decreasing the length property truncates array, all higher indexes are deleted
- using delete on an array item doesn't update the `length` property of the array, use `Array.prototype.splice()` method instead



## Array iteration

### for loop

```javascript
for (let i = 0; i < arr.length; i++) {
  statements;
}
```

- loops over all indices of an array
- does not skip non-existing elements, since`i` increases until length property ❗️

### for...in loop

```javascript
for (const i in arr) {
  statements;
}
```

- loops over all enumerable property _names_, not just indices
- includes inherited enumerable properties ❗️
- doesn't necessarily iterate in order, implementation dependent
- use only for debugging to see all properties

### for...of loop

```javascript
for (const item of arr) {
  statements;
}
```

- loops over all indexed elements of an array
- does not skip non-existing elements, i.e. like a for loop ❗️

### `Array.prototype.forEach()`

```javascript
arr.forEach((currentElement, i) => {...});
```

- for each element calls a function with element, index and optional parameters as argument
- skips non-existing elements
- returns itself `undefined`



## `Array` object type

### Properties

- `Array.from()`: creates new array from iterable or array-like object

- `Array.isArray()`: checks if argument is array, fix for broken `typeof` operator
- `Array.of()`: creates new array from arguments

### Prototype properties

- `Array.prototype.concat()`: joins array(s) to back of existing
- `Array.prototype.join()`: joins elements of array to string using separator
- `Array.prototype.push()`: adds element(s) to end of array, returns new length
- `Array.prototype.unshift()`: adds element(s) to front of array, returns new length
- `Array.prototype.pop()`: removes last element from array, returns this element
- `Array.prototype.shift()`: removes first element from array, returns this element
- `Array.prototype.slice()`: returns section of array
- `Array.prototype.splice()`: replaces / removes section from array, returns section
- `Array.prototype.reverse()`: returns reversed array
- `Array.prototype.sort()`: returns sorted array, can specify sort function
- `Array.prototype.indexOf()`: returns index of first matching element
- `Array.prototype.lastIndexOf()`: returns index of last matching element
- `Array.prototype.forEach()`: calls a function for each element
- `Array.prototype.map()`: returns array with results from calling a function for each element
- `Array.prototype.filter()`: returns array with all elements for which calling the function returned true
- `Array.prototype.every()`: returns true if function returned true for each element
- `Array.prototype.some()`: returns true if function returned true for at least one element
- `Array.prototype.reduce()`: combines elements by recursively calling a function from left-to-right with previous result as argument
- `Array.prototype.rightReduce()`: reduce from right-to-left



## Resources

- MDN - as usual

Commit message:

Add Node.md, Svelte.md, ESLint folder, move TypeScript configuration. Add cherrypicking to Git Cheat Sheet and clean up. Clean up Asynchronous JS, Arrays, Events API, Runtime environment. Small corrections to Introduction, move 'hoisting' into Functions. In Objects improve 'this', reorder 'date constructor', fix formatting. In Functions rewrite 'Scope', improve 'Hoisting', move 'lexical' to single side note, reword Introduction, encourage named function expressions, add more examples using IIFE, fix minor formatting.

Front-End Web Development/JavaScript Core/4. Arrays.md, after:

# Arrays

[TOC]



## Introduction

- ordered set of values, indexed collection
- special objects with dynamic length property, constructor is `Array`
- indexes are just integer property names, starting from `0`, can add other properties like with any object
- can access integer property names only using bracket notation since integers are not valid identifiers, e.g. `arr[5]`
- length property returns largest integer property plus 1, i.e. other properties don't count against length
- values can be of any data type, arrays grow / shrink dynamically without bounds since just object, i.e. not "out of bound" error
- beware: arrays are _not_ linear allocations of memory like in other languages, objects that are made to look like it, i.e. not fast at all ❗️



## Creating arrays

- array literal: `[element0, element1]`
- array constructor: `new Array(element0, element1)`, if argument single integer creates array with that length and all values `undefined`
- see `Array.of()` and `Array.from()` later



## Array elements

- doesn't need to assign to indexes in ascending order, can just assign to any property like object

```javascript
const arr = ["Hello", "World"];
arr[42] = "Illuminati";
```

- any non-integer element becomes a typical property name as string

```javascript
arr[3.5] = 1010; // creates property name "3.5"
console.log(arr["3.5"]) // 1010
```

- length property returns last index plus 1, computed internally

```javascript
console.log(arr.length); // 43
```

- increasing the length property does _not_ expand the array, just increases length property  
  beware: accessing non-existing elements returns `undefined` even though they do not exist at all, they are not just `undefined` ❗️
- decreasing the length property truncates array, all higher indexes are deleted
- using delete on an array item doesn't update the `length` property of the array, use `Array.prototype.splice()` instead



## Array iteration

### for loop

```javascript
for (let i = 0; i < arr.length; i++) {
  statements;
}
```

- loops over all indices of an array
- does not skip non-existing elements, since`i` increases until length property ❗️

### for...in loop

```javascript
for (const i in arr) {
  statements;
}
```

- loops over all enumerable property _names_, not just indices
- includes inherited enumerable properties ❗️
- doesn't necessarily iterate in order, implementation dependent
- use only for debugging to see all properties

### for...of loop

```javascript
for (const item of arr) {
  statements;
}
```

- loops over all indexed elements of an array
- does not skip non-existing elements, i.e. like a for loop ❗️

### `Array.prototype.forEach()`

```javascript
arr.forEach((currentElement, i) => {...});
```

- for each element calls a function with element, index and optional parameters as argument
- skips non-existing elements
- ignores return value of callback function
- returns itself `undefined`



## `Array` object type

### Properties

- `Array.from()`: creates new array from iterable or array-like object
- `Array.isArray()`: checks if argument is array, fix for broken `typeof` operator
- `Array.of()`: creates new array from arguments

### Prototype properties

- `Array.prototype.concat()`: joins array(s) to back of existing
- `Array.prototype.join()`: joins elements of array to string using separator
- `Array.prototype.push()`: adds element(s) to end of array, returns new length
- `Array.prototype.unshift()`: adds element(s) to front of array, returns new length
- `Array.prototype.pop()`: removes last element from array, returns this element
- `Array.prototype.shift()`: removes first element from array, returns this element
- `Array.prototype.slice()`: returns section of array
- `Array.prototype.splice()`: replaces / removes section from array, returns section
- `Array.prototype.reverse()`: returns reversed array
- `Array.prototype.sort()`: returns sorted array, can specify sort function
- `Array.prototype.indexOf()`: returns index of first matching element
- `Array.prototype.lastIndexOf()`: returns index of last matching element
- `Array.prototype.forEach()`: calls a function for each element
- `Array.prototype.map()`: returns array with results from calling a function for each element
- `Array.prototype.filter()`: returns array with all elements for which calling the function returned true
- `Array.prototype.every()`: returns true if function returned true for each element
- `Array.prototype.some()`: returns true if function returned true for at least one element
- `Array.prototype.reduce()`: combines elements by recursively calling a function from left-to-right with previous result as argument
- `Array.prototype.rightReduce()`: reduce from right-to-left



## Resources

- MDN - as usual
