Front-End Web Development/JavaScript Client-Side/1. Introduction.md, before:

# Introduction

[TOC]

## Client-side JS

- JS is a scripting language, it tells its host environment what to do, by itself it can not interact with the computer

- the host environment needs to implement mechanisms for interacting with the computer, e.g. input / output, events, etc.

  see Browser APIs

- almost every computer has a JS interpreter - the browser - which makes JS one of the most popular programming languages in the world



## Types of client-side JS

### External 👍

- script in separate .js file

- reference .js in `<script>` element anywhere in `<html>` section

  ```html
  <script src="...js"></script>
  ```

- can omit `type` attribute since JS is default scripting language
- content must be empty if `src` attribute is present
- best practice, seperates JS from HTML

### Internal 👎

- script in .html file

- script in `<script>` element anywhere in `<html>` section

  ```html
  <script>...</script>
  ```

- not recommended, mixes JS with HTML

### Inline 👎

- script in .html file

- script in on`event` attribute of single HTML element

  ```html
  <tagname onevent="...">...</tagname>
  ```

- not recommended, mixes JS with HTML



## Load script

- script is loaded and executed at location in HTML
- problem: blocks everything else, page parsing, other scripts, until it is loaded and run to completion, also it can't access later content because it is not yet loaded
- primitive solution: put script at end after `<body>`
- modern solution: browser can load scripts async, even multiple at same time, but for execution needs to stop page load or wait until is done

- `async`: fetches script async, executes it as soon as loaded, possibly blocking page load, async scripts are executed in order of loading, what loads first runs first, good if script is independent from page and other scripts, e.g. ads, calculations, etc.

- `defer`: fetches script async, executes it after page load, defered scripts are executed in order of appearance, good for any dependent scripts

- code is run in order of appearance, like one big file, i.e. later variables can overwrite previous ones, has access to content of other scripts

- a script is limited to current browser tab



## Web APIs

- Application Programming Interface (API): particular set of rules that two software programs can follow to interact with each other, abstraction layer of underlying implementation
- Web API: client-side API

### Browser APIs

- interface to interact with browser and therefore the page
- usually provide JS objects with properties and methods, the constructor is called "interface"
- often constraint to security measures, e.g. permission request, URLs must be HTTPs, etc.

#### Common Browser APIs

- DOM, BOM, CSSOM: interact with page
- XMLHttpRequest, Fetch: downloading remote data
- Canvas, WebGL, requestAnimationFrame: draw, animate
- HTMLMediaElement, Web Audio, WebRTC: play media
- Geolocation, Notification, Vibration: device functions
- Web Storage, IndexedDB: client-side storage
- Web Workers: background computation

### Third Party APIs

- interface to interact with 3rd party service, e.g. maps, content
- needs Browser APIs to fetch data
- often constraint to security measures, e.g. API key required



## Symbol reference

- 👍/👎 new / old way of doing things, prefer new way

- 🚫 deprecated, should not be used
- ❗️important, make sure you remember this
- ⚠️ beware, make sure you definitely remember this
- ❓I still need confirmation on this

Commit message:

Write first half of Objects, add Ajax, ES versions table, destructuring assignment, spread operator to Introduction begin writing Functions, add Resources section to all files, few smaller changes, smaller updates to Git CheatSheet

Front-End Web Development/JavaScript Client-Side/1. Introduction.md, after:

# Introduction

[TOC]

## Client-side JS

- JS is a scripting language, it tells its host environment what to do, by itself it can not interact with the computer

- the host environment needs to implement mechanisms for interacting with the computer, e.g. input / output, events, etc.

  see Browser APIs

- almost every computer has a JS interpreter - the browser - which makes JS one of the most popular programming languages in the world



## Types of client-side JS

### External 👍

- script in separate .js file

- reference .js in `<script>` element anywhere in `<html>` section

  ```html
  <script src="...js"></script>
  ```

- can omit `type` attribute since JS is default scripting language
- content must be empty if `src` attribute is present
- best practice, seperates JS from HTML

### Internal 👎

- script in .html file

- script in `<script>` element anywhere in `<html>` section

  ```html
  <script>...</script>
  ```

- not recommended, mixes JS with HTML

### Inline 👎

- script in .html file

- script in on`event` attribute of single HTML element

  ```html
  <tagname onevent="...">...</tagname>
  ```

- not recommended, mixes JS with HTML



## Load script

- script is loaded and executed at location in HTML
- problem: blocks everything else, page parsing, other scripts, until it is loaded and run to completion, also it can't access later content because it is not yet loaded
- primitive solution: put script at end after `<body>`
- modern solution: browser can load scripts async, even multiple at same time, but for execution needs to stop page load or wait until is done

- `async`: fetches script async, executes it as soon as loaded, possibly blocking page load, async scripts are executed in order of loading, what loads first runs first, good if script is independent from page and other scripts, e.g. ads, calculations, etc.

- `defer`: fetches script async, executes it after page load, defered scripts are executed in order of appearance, good for any dependent scripts

- code is run in order of appearance, like one big file, i.e. later variables can overwrite previous ones, has access to content of other scripts

- a script is limited to current browser tab



## Web APIs

- Application Programming Interface (API): particular set of rules that two software programs can follow to interact with each other, abstraction layer of underlying implementation
- Web API: client-side API

### Browser APIs

- interface to interact with browser and therefore the page
- usually provide JS objects with properties and methods, the constructor is called "interface"
- often constraint to security measures, e.g. permission request, URLs must be HTTPs, etc.

#### Common Browser APIs

- DOM, BOM, CSSOM: interact with page
- XMLHttpRequest, Fetch: downloading remote data
- Canvas, WebGL, requestAnimationFrame: draw, animate
- HTMLMediaElement, Web Audio, WebRTC: play media
- Geolocation, Notification, Vibration: device functions
- Web Storage, IndexedDB: client-side storage
- Web Workers: background computation

### Third Party APIs

- interface to interact with 3rd party service, e.g. maps, content
- needs Browser APIs to fetch data
- often constraint to security measures, e.g. API key required



## AJAX (Asynchronous JavaScript + XML)

- architectural style of web applications that dynamically update content asynchronously
- instead of loading whole new page for every small update, fetches and updates only what changes, e.g. search engine fetches only new results and appends them to page, same for maps, social media, etc.
- name contains XML because data was transmitted in text format XML, today is transmitted in JSON

- makes use of XMLHttpRequest, CSS, DOM, etc., name should actually be "Asynchronous JavaScript+CSS+DOM+XMLHttpRequest"
- today is standard way of creating web pages, but back in 2005 was totally new approach, therefore got its own name
- AJAX engine: implementation of AJAX, e.g. the function that fetches and updates the changes



## Symbol reference

- 👍 / 👎 new / old way of doing things, prefer new way

- 🚫 deprecated, should not be used
- ❗️important, make sure you understand this
- ⚠️ attention, make sure you definitely understand this
- ❓unconfirmed statement, not sure yet



## Resources

- MDN - [JavaScript Guide](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide) and individual pages
- Ilya Kantor - [The Modern Javascript Tutorial](https://javascript.info/)
- Douglas Crockford - [Crockford on Javascript - Volume 1-8](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL7664379246A246CB)
- Kyle Simpson - [Deep JavaScript Foundations, v3](https://frontendmasters.com/courses/deep-javascript-v3/)
- Jesse James Garrett - [Ajax: A New Approach to Web Applications](https://web.archive.org/web/20150910072359/http://adaptivepath.org/ideas/ajax-new-approach-web-applications/)
- Wikipedia for terminology
