Front-End Web Development/JavaScript Client-Side/6. Runtime.md, before:

# Runtime (environment)

[TOC]

## Runtime (environment)

(see also later Asynchronous JS)

- the language-specific software that supports the execution of a program written in that language
- is part of the Execution Model
- comprised of memory management, variable contexts, OS APIs, etc.

- JS is scripting language, doesn't do runtime itself, needs runtime, e.g. browser❗️



## Program instance

### Process

- group of related resources, like house
- has an address space, heap, global variables, open files, etc.
- contains one or more threads

### Thread

- sequence of instructions run by CPU, like person in house
- has program counter, registers, call stack, etc.
- single CPU core can run only _one thread at a time_
- switching multiple threads intelligently makes impression of multitasking
- threads get scheduled by kernel according to their priority



## (A)Synchronicity

### Synchronous operations

- one can't start until the previous has completed, "blocking"

- dependent on each other
- i.e. single thread on single core

### Asynchronous operations

- one can start before the previous has completed, "non-blocking"
- independent of each other
- parallel: multiple threads on multiple cores, i.e. really parallel
- concurrent: multiple threads on single core, i.e. seemingly parallel



- -> JS itself is single-threaded, runs on "main thread" of runtime

- -> since JS is single-threaded it is "blocking", synchronous

- -> but runtime environment - browser - provides access to more threads via Browser APIs, e.g. `setTimeout`, `XHRHttpRequest`, Event Listeners, etc. enables concurrency, "asynchronous operation"
- -> since browser styling, layout, rendering run on main thread as well, expensive JS function blocks code and makes page freeze



## Data structures

### Stack

- collection of elements
- Last In First Out (LIFO), like pile of plates
- has push and pop operations, e.g. array



### Queue

- collection of elements
- First in First Out (FIFO), like line at grocery store
- has enqueue and dequeue operations



## Runtime environment

<!-- ToDo: write -> cleaner -->

### Call stack (of main thread)

- stack of active functions
- push when called, pop after returned
- "stack overflow" when stack exceeds available memory, e.g. with infinite (non-tail) recursion
- dev tools show "stack trace" of functions when error happens



- -> JS runs only on call stack of main thread
- -> call to Browser API immediately completes from call stack, gets executed in seperate thread, call stack can continue



### Task / Callback queue (of main thread)

- queue for callbacks from Browser API calls that returned, to get executed on main thread
- there can be multiple queues depending on runtime, e.g. in browser
  - macrotask queue: callbacks from `setTimeout`, `XHRHttpRequest`, Event Listeners, etc.
  - rendering pipeline: styling layout, repaint of page
  - microtask queue: callbacks attached to promises, or from Mutation Observer
  - own queues: `IndexedDB`, `requestAnimationFrame`, etc.

- browser schedules rendering intelligently only when needed, i.e. adapts to screen refresh rate, usually every ~16 ms (≙60 FPS)



### Event loop (of main thread)

- loops over task queues, executes callbacks on main thread
- only when call stack is empty / clear
- -> callback gets immediately executed once on call stack since it's clear by requirement
- -> _any_ async code must wait till _all_ sync code is done / stack is clear
- -> `setTimeout(callback, 0)` is like adding to bottom of stack
- -> `setTimeout` waiting time is only _minimum time_, needs to account for waiting time in task queue as well
- -> "run to completion": any callback will run to completion, can't be stopped in middle to run another one, unlike in C++
- -> no race of threads, e.g. a click event handler is executed to completion before any repaint can happen, i.e. no flashing while changing DOM

- priority of task queues per loop:
  1. _one_ macrotask is executed, very first is script itself ⚠️
  2. _all_ microtasks are run, until microtask queue is empty, including ones that are added while running
  3. if repaint is needed, _all_ rAF callbacks are run, only currently queued, not one that are added while running
  4. if repaint is needed, _one_ rendering from rendering pipeline is run
- -> rAF is efficient, runs only together with repaint, adapts to screen refresh rate and only when visible, while `setTimeout` doesn't adapt at all, always runs, runs too often, etc.
- -> since all rAF callbacks are run, must nest rAF twice to schedule change for next instead of current render ❗️
- -> run expensive code in async parts, e.g. with `setTimeout(fn, 0)`, so browser can schedule repaints in between callbacks when needed, since they are on the macrotask and run only once per event loop, or if purely computational task use Web Workers
- -> beware: events can behave differently when triggered normally or artificially in JS, because via page the call stack is initially clear, while via JS the triggering itself is a function on the stack, can make task queues wait till stack is clear ⚠️
- -> beware: one large macrotask or many small microtasks can block stack, browser can't render, page freezes



## Memory management

- runtime automatically allocates memory when needed
- garbage collection: runtime automatically frees memory when not needed anymore
- reference: when an object has access to another, implicit or explicit, e.g. through closure, property, etc.
- -> still needs to write good code to not block garbage collection

### Reference-counting garbage collection

- old implementation
- object is garbage collected when there are no more references to it
- problem: circular references prevent garbage collection, common source of memory leaks

### Mark-and-sweep garbage collection

- current implementation in all modern runtimes
- object is garbage collected when there are no more references to it from the root (global object), when it is not "reachable" anymore
- solves cirular reference problem

Commit message:

Write first half of Objects, add Ajax, ES versions table, destructuring assignment, spread operator to Introduction begin writing Functions, add Resources section to all files, few smaller changes, smaller updates to Git CheatSheet

Front-End Web Development/JavaScript Client-Side/6. Runtime.md, after:

# Runtime (environment)

[TOC]

## Runtime (environment)

(see also later Asynchronous JS)

- the language-specific software that supports the execution of a program written in that language
- is part of the Execution Model
- comprised of memory management, variable contexts, OS APIs, etc.

- JS is scripting language, doesn't do runtime itself, needs runtime, e.g. browser❗️



## Program instance

### Process

- group of related resources, like house
- has an address space, heap, global variables, open files, etc.
- contains one or more threads

### Thread

- sequence of instructions run by CPU, like person in house
- has program counter, registers, call stack, etc.
- single CPU core can run only _one thread at a time_
- switching multiple threads intelligently makes impression of multitasking
- threads get scheduled by kernel according to their priority



## (A)Synchronicity

### Synchronous operations

- one can't start until the previous has completed, "blocking"

- dependent on each other
- i.e. single thread on single core

### Asynchronous operations

- one can start before the previous has completed, "non-blocking"
- independent of each other
- parallel: multiple threads on multiple cores, i.e. really parallel
- concurrent: multiple threads on single core, i.e. seemingly parallel



- -> JS itself is single-threaded, runs on "main thread" of runtime

- -> since JS is single-threaded it is "blocking", synchronous

- -> but runtime environment - browser - provides access to more threads via Browser APIs, e.g. `setTimeout`, `XHRHttpRequest`, Event Listeners, etc. enables concurrency, "asynchronous operation"
- -> since browser styling, layout, rendering run on main thread as well, expensive JS function blocks code and makes page freeze



## Data structures

### Stack

- collection of elements
- Last In First Out (LIFO), like pile of plates
- has push and pop operations, e.g. array



### Queue

- collection of elements
- First in First Out (FIFO), like line at grocery store
- has enqueue and dequeue operations



## Runtime environment

<!-- ToDo: write -> cleaner -->

### Call stack (of main thread)

- stack of active functions
- push when called, pop after returned
- "stack overflow" when stack exceeds available memory, e.g. with infinite (non-tail) recursion
- dev tools show "stack trace" of functions when error happens



- -> JS runs only on call stack of main thread
- -> call to Browser API immediately completes from call stack, gets executed in seperate thread, call stack can continue



### Task / Callback queue (of main thread)

- queue for callbacks from Browser API calls that returned, to get executed on main thread
- there can be multiple queues depending on runtime, e.g. in browser
  - macrotask queue: callbacks from `setTimeout`, `XHRHttpRequest`, Event Listeners, etc.
  - rendering pipeline: styling layout, repaint of page
  - microtask queue: callbacks attached to promises, or from Mutation Observer
  - own queues: `IndexedDB`, `requestAnimationFrame`, etc.

- browser schedules rendering intelligently only when needed, i.e. adapts to screen refresh rate, usually every ~16 ms (≙60 FPS)



### Event loop (of main thread)

- loops over task queues, executes callbacks on main thread
- only when call stack is empty / clear
- -> callback gets immediately executed once on call stack since it's clear by requirement
- -> _any_ async code must wait till _all_ sync code is done / stack is clear
- -> `setTimeout(callback, 0)` is like adding to bottom of stack
- -> `setTimeout` waiting time is only _minimum time_, needs to account for waiting time in task queue as well
- -> "run to completion": any callback will run to completion, can't be stopped in middle to run another one, unlike in C++
- -> no race of threads, e.g. a click event handler is executed to completion before any repaint can happen, i.e. no flashing while changing DOM

- priority of task queues per loop:
  1. _one_ macrotask is executed, very first is script itself ⚠️
  2. _all_ microtasks are run, until microtask queue is empty, including ones that are added while running
  3. if repaint is needed, _all_ rAF callbacks are run, only currently queued, not one that are added while running
  4. if repaint is needed, _one_ rendering from rendering pipeline is run
- -> rAF is efficient, runs only together with repaint, adapts to screen refresh rate and only when visible, while `setTimeout` doesn't adapt at all, always runs, runs too often, etc.
- -> since all rAF callbacks are run, must nest rAF twice to schedule change for next instead of current render ❗️
- ---> event loop must run fast to be non-blocking, either split expensive code in multiple async parts, e.g. with `setTimeout(fn, 0)`, so browser can schedule repaints in between callbacks when needed, since they are on the macrotask and run only once per event loop, or if purely computational task use entirely seperate thread, e.g. using Web Workers
- -> beware: events can behave differently when triggered normally or artificially in JS, because via page the call stack is initially clear, while via JS the triggering itself is a function on the stack, can make task queues wait till stack is clear ⚠️
- -> beware: one large macrotask or many small microtasks can block stack, browser can't render, page freezes



## Memory management

- runtime automatically allocates memory when needed
- garbage collection: runtime automatically frees memory when not needed anymore
- reference: when an object has access to another, implicit or explicit, e.g. through closure, property, etc.
- -> still needs to write good code to not block garbage collection

### Reference-counting garbage collection

- old implementation
- object is garbage collected when there are no more references to it
- problem: circular references prevent garbage collection, common source of memory leaks

### Mark-and-sweep garbage collection

- current implementation in all modern runtimes
- object is garbage collected when there are no more references to it from the root (global object), when it is not "reachable" anymore
- solves cirular reference problem



## Resources

- MDN - as usual
- The Modern Javascript Tutorial - as usual
- Philip Roberts - [What the heck is the event loop anyway?](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8aGhZQkoFbQ)
- Jake Archibald - [In The Loop](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cCOL7MC4Pl0)
- Erin Zimmer - [Further Adventures of the Event Loop](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u1kqx6AenYw)
