Languages/JavaScript/Web APIs/5. Timeout API.md, before:

# Timeout API

[TOC]


<!-- todo: finish -->

## Introduction

- API for delays



## `setTimeout()`

`WindowOrWorkerGlobalScope.setTimeout(callback, delay)`

- executes callback once after a delay of delay ms, simple timer
- returns unique identifier, integer
- if timer has not yet elapsed can cancel using `clearTimeout(timeoutID)` (or `clearInterval(timeoutID)` since `setInterval()` shares the same ID pool)  
  beware: an invalid ID does not throw an error ❗️
- `this` inside callback will be back to default (global object / undefined in non- / strict mode) since callback is passed as argument to another function, can preserve it by wrapping _value of callback_ in anonymous function❗️

```javascript
setTimeout(() => {callback()}, delay)
```

- the delay is actually only the minimum wait time, because the task queue needs to wait until the call stack is clear before the callback can be executed (see Runtime)
- for animation use `requestAnimationFrame()`, and `setInterval()` for constant timed calls
- nested `setTimeout` calls are throttled by browser, in foreground maximal every 4 ms, in background maximal every 1s



## `setInterval()`

`WindowOrWorkerGlobalScope.setInterval(callback, delay)`

- executes callback repeatedly every delay ms, simple loop
- returns unique identifier, integer
- if timer has not yet elapsed can cancel using `clearInterval(timeoutID)` (or `clearTimeout(timeoutID)` since `setTimeout()` shares the same ID pool)  
  beware: an invalid ID does not throw an error ❗️
- `this` inside callback will be back to default (global object / undefined in non- / strict mode) since callback is passed as argument to another function, can preserve it by wrapping _value of callback_ in anonymous function❗️

```javascript
setInterval(() => {callback()}, delay)
```

- the delay is actually only the minimum wait time, because the task queue needs to wait until the call stack is clear before the callback can be executed (see Runtime)
- interval does not adjust to how long code takes to run, i.e. if code runs longer than delay, next call is run even before previous returned
- use `setInterval` to guarantee constant delay between consecutive call starts, while recursive `setTimeout` to guarantee constant delay between previous call end and next call start

```javascript
(function constantGap() {
  setTimeout(() => {
    // your code here
    constantGap();
  }, delay);
})();
```

- `setInterval` calls are throttled by browser, in foreground maximal every 4 ms, in background maximal every 1s



## Resources

- MDN - as usual
- The Modern Javascript Tutorial - as usual

Commit message:

javascript/web-apis: clarify Timeout and Animation APIs

Languages/JavaScript/Web APIs/5. Timeout API.md, after:

# Timeout API

[TOC]



## Introduction

- API for delays
- for animation use rAF instead
- runs in (almost) every event loop tick, much more often than screen can refresh
- runs in background even if tab is not visible
- beware: inefficient ❗️
- beware: delay is only the minimum delay, needs to wait for current operation to yield to next event loop tick and any tasks that are already in macrotask queue to finish ❗️



## `setTimeout()`

`WindowOrWorkerGlobalScope.setTimeout(callback, delay)`

- executes callback once after a delay in ms
- returns unique identifier, integer
- if timer has not yet elapsed can cancel using `clearTimeout(timeoutID)` (or `clearInterval(timeoutID)` since `setInterval()` shares the same ID pool)  
  beware: an invalid ID does not throw an error ❗️
- `this` inside callback will be back to default (global object / undefined in non- / strict mode) since callback is passed as argument to another function, can preserve it by wrapping _value of callback_ in anonymous function❗️

```javascript
setTimeout(() => {callback()}, delay)
```

- use recursive `setTimeout` for constant delay between previous call end and next call start
- use `setInterval` for constant delay between consecutive call starts
- nested `setTimeout` calls are throttled by browser, in foreground maximal every 4 ms, in background maximal every 1s


## `setInterval()`

`WindowOrWorkerGlobalScope.setInterval(callback, delay)`

- executes callback repeatedly every delay in ms, simple loop
- returns unique identifier, integer
- if timer has not yet elapsed can cancel using `clearInterval(timeoutID)` (or `clearTimeout(timeoutID)` since `setTimeout()` shares the same ID pool)  
  beware: an invalid ID does not throw an error ❗️
- `this` inside callback will be back to default (global object / undefined in non- / strict mode) since callback is passed as argument to another function, can preserve it by wrapping _value of callback_ in anonymous function❗️

```javascript
setInterval(() => {callback()}, delay)
```

- use `setInterval` for constant delay between consecutive call starts
- use recursive `setTimeout` for constant delay between previous call end and next call start
- beware: interval does not adjust to how long code takes to run, i.e. if code runs longer than delay, next call is run even before previous returned ❗️
- `setInterval` calls are throttled by browser, in foreground maximal every 4 ms, in background maximal every 1s



## Resources

- MDN - as usual
- The Modern Javascript Tutorial - as usual
