Languages/JavaScript Client-Side/1. Introduction.md, before:

# Introduction

[TOC]



## Client-side JS

- JS is a scripting language, it tells its host environment what to do, by itself it can not interact with the computer
- the host environment needs to implement mechanisms for interacting with the computer, e.g. input / output, events, etc.
  see Browser APIs
- almost every computer has a JS interpreter - the browser - which makes JS one of the most popular programming languages in the world



## Types of client-side JS

### External 👍

- script in separate .js file
- reference .js in `<script>` element anywhere in `<html>` section

```html
<script src="...js"></script>
```

- can omit `type` attribute since JS is default scripting language
- content must be empty if `src` attribute is present
- best practice, separates JS from HTML

### Internal 👎

- script in .html file
- script in `<script>` element anywhere in `<html>` section

```html
<script>...</script>
```

- not recommended, mixes JS with HTML

### Inline 👎

- script in .html file
- script in on`event` attribute of single HTML element

```html
<tagname onevent="...">...</tagname>
```

- not recommended, mixes JS with HTML



## Loading external scripts

- when running a script, it always blocks the page, i.e. parsing during page load must be paused, can either do in between or after page load
- loading script can be done asynchronously parallel to page load or synchronously blocking page load
- by default `<script>` tag is (loaded and) executed at location in HTML
- problem: blocks parsing of page until finished, also can't access later page content because it's not yet loaded
- primitive solution: put script at end after `<body>` tag, but delays execution since browser can only start to load it after it parsed HTML until location
- modern solution: load scripts async, even multiple at same time, but for execution still needs to stop page load or wait until is done
  - `async`: fetches script async, executes it as soon as loaded, then blocking page, async scripts are executed in order of loading, what loads first runs first, good if script is independent from page and other scripts, e.g. ads, calculations, etc.
  - `defer`: fetches script async, executes it after page load, deferred scripts are executed in order of appearance, good if script is dependent on page
- by default any code is run in global scope, i.e. later variables can overwrite previous ones, has access to content of other scripts, i.e. use IIFE to limit scope
- a script is limited to current browser tab

### ES Modules

- problem: load multiple scripts, needs to be in exactly the right order they depend on
- primitive solution: concat to single file, needs to be in order they depend if dependencies are not all hoisted (e.g. const)
- still problem: clutter and modify global scope, browser probably loads lots of dead code on every page
- modern solution: ES Modules
  - only needs single script tag for entry file, order is figured out by browser 🎉
  - every module has it's own scope, i.e. solves global scope problem 🎉
  - browser can load only what's really needed on current page 🎉
- split in as many modules as possible
- use `type = "module"` on script tag because modules are parsed differently than classical scripts, further imported modules are known to be modules already
- module script is deferred by default, i.e. no need for `defered` attribute
- script tag with boolean attribute `nomodule` is ignored by module-supporting browsers, i.e. can provide fallback for non-module-supporting browsers

```html
<script type="module" src="main.js"></script>
<script nomodule src="fallback.js"></script>
```



## Web APIs

- client-side API

### Browser APIs

- interface to interact with browser and therefore the page
- usually provide JS objects with properties and methods, the constructor is called "interface"
- often constraint to security measures, e.g. permission request, URLs must be HTTPs, etc.

#### Common Browser APIs

- DOM, BOM, CSSOM: interact with page
- Fetch: downloading remote data
- Canvas, WebGL, requestAnimationFrame: draw, animate
- HTMLMediaElement, Web Audio, WebRTC: play media
- Geolocation, Notification, Vibration: device functions
- Web Storage, IndexedDB: client-side storage
- Web Workers: background computation

### Third Party APIs

- interface to interact with 3rd party service, e.g. maps, content
- needs Browser APIs to fetch data
- often constraint to security measures, e.g. API key required



## AJAX (Asynchronous JavaScript + XML)

- architectural style of web applications that dynamically update content asynchronously
- instead of loading whole new page for every small update, fetches and updates only what changes, e.g. search engine fetches only new results and appends them to page, same for maps, social media, etc.
- name contains XML because data was transmitted in text format XML, today is transmitted in JSON
- makes use of Fetch API, CSS, DOM, etc., name should actually be "Asynchronous JavaScript + CSS + DOM + Fetch API"
- today is standard way of creating web pages, but back in 2005 was totally new approach, therefore got its own name
- AJAX engine: implementation of AJAX, e.g. the function that fetches and updates the changes



## Symbol reference

- 👍 / 👎 new / old way of doing things, prefer new way
- 🚫 deprecated, should not be used
- ❗️important, make sure you understand this
- ⚠️ attention, make sure you definitely understand this
- ❓unconfirmed statement, not sure yet



## Resources

- MDN - [JavaScript Guide](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide) and individual pages
- Ilya Kantor - [The Modern Javascript Tutorial](https://javascript.info/)
- Douglas Crockford - [Crockford on Javascript - Volume 1-8](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL7664379246A246CB)
- Jesse James Garrett - [Ajax: A New Approach to Web Applications](https://web.archive.org/web/20150910072359/http://adaptivepath.org/ideas/ajax-new-approach-web-applications/)
- Wikipedia for terminology

Commit message:

fix(JavaScript): use dynamic imports for conditionally used import

Languages/JavaScript Client-Side/1. Introduction.md, after:

# Introduction

[TOC]



## Client-side JS

- JS is a scripting language, it tells its host environment what to do, by itself it can not interact with the computer
- the host environment needs to implement mechanisms for interacting with the computer, e.g. input / output, events, etc.
  see Browser APIs
- almost every computer has a JS interpreter - the browser - which makes JS one of the most popular programming languages in the world



## Types of client-side JS

### External 👍

- script in separate .js file
- reference .js in `<script>` element anywhere in `<html>` section

```html
<script src="...js"></script>
```

- can omit `type` attribute since JS is default scripting language
- content must be empty if `src` attribute is present
- best practice, separates JS from HTML

### Internal 👎

- script in .html file
- script in `<script>` element anywhere in `<html>` section

```html
<script>...</script>
```

- not recommended, mixes JS with HTML

### Inline 👎

- script in .html file
- script in on`event` attribute of single HTML element

```html
<tagname onevent="...">...</tagname>
```

- not recommended, mixes JS with HTML



## Loading external scripts

- when running a script, it always blocks the page, i.e. parsing during page load must be paused, can either do in between or after page load
- loading script can be done asynchronously parallel to page load or synchronously blocking page load
- by default `<script>` tag is (loaded and) executed at location in HTML
- problem: blocks parsing of page until finished, also can't access later page content because it's not yet loaded
- primitive solution: put script at end after `<body>` tag, but delays execution since browser can only start to load it after it parsed HTML until location
- modern solution: load scripts async, even multiple at same time, but for execution still needs to stop page load or wait until is done
  - `async`: fetches script async, executes it as soon as loaded, then blocking page, async scripts are executed in order of loading, what loads first runs first, good if script is independent from page and other scripts, e.g. ads, calculations, etc.
  - `defer`: fetches script async, executes it after page load, deferred scripts are executed in order of appearance, good if script is dependent on page
- by default any code is run in global scope, i.e. later variables can overwrite previous ones, has access to content of other scripts, i.e. use IIFE to limit scope
- a script is limited to current browser tab

### ES Modules

- problem: load multiple scripts, needs to be in exactly the right order they depend on
- primitive solution: concat to single file, needs to be in order they depend if dependencies are not all hoisted (e.g. const)
- still problem: clutter and modify global scope, browser probably loads lots of dead code on every page
- modern solution: ES Modules
  - only needs single script tag for entry file, order is figured out by browser 🎉
  - every module has it's own scope, i.e. solves global scope problem 🎉
  - browser can load only what's really needed on current page 🎉
- split in as many modules as possible
- use `type = "module"` on script tag because modules are parsed differently than classical scripts, further imported modules are known to be modules already
- module script is deferred by default, i.e. no need for `defered` attribute
- script tag with boolean attribute `nomodule` is ignored by module-supporting browsers, i.e. can provide fallback for non-module-supporting browsers

```html
<script type="module" src="main.js"></script>
<script nomodule src="fallback.js"></script>
```

- beware: use dynamic import for dependencies in module if are used only in certain condition, then use `<link rel="preload">` or show loading indicator ❗️



## Web APIs

- client-side API

### Browser APIs

- interface to interact with browser and therefore the page
- usually provide JS objects with properties and methods, the constructor is called "interface"
- often constraint to security measures, e.g. permission request, URLs must be HTTPs, etc.

#### Common Browser APIs

- DOM, BOM, CSSOM: interact with page
- Fetch: downloading remote data
- Canvas, WebGL, requestAnimationFrame: draw, animate
- HTMLMediaElement, Web Audio, WebRTC: play media
- Geolocation, Notification, Vibration: device functions
- Web Storage, IndexedDB: client-side storage
- Web Workers: background computation

### Third Party APIs

- interface to interact with 3rd party service, e.g. maps, content
- needs Browser APIs to fetch data
- often constraint to security measures, e.g. API key required



## AJAX (Asynchronous JavaScript + XML)

- architectural style of web applications that dynamically update content asynchronously
- instead of loading whole new page for every small update, fetches and updates only what changes, e.g. search engine fetches only new results and appends them to page, same for maps, social media, etc.
- name contains XML because data was transmitted in text format XML, today is transmitted in JSON
- makes use of Fetch API, CSS, DOM, etc., name should actually be "Asynchronous JavaScript + CSS + DOM + Fetch API"
- today is standard way of creating web pages, but back in 2005 was totally new approach, therefore got its own name
- AJAX engine: implementation of AJAX, e.g. the function that fetches and updates the changes



## Symbol reference

- 👍 / 👎 new / old way of doing things, prefer new way
- 🚫 deprecated, should not be used
- ❗️important, make sure you understand this
- ⚠️ attention, make sure you definitely understand this
- ❓unconfirmed statement, not sure yet



## Resources

- MDN - [JavaScript Guide](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide) and individual pages
- Ilya Kantor - [The Modern Javascript Tutorial](https://javascript.info/)
- Douglas Crockford - [Crockford on Javascript - Volume 1-8](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL7664379246A246CB)
- Jesse James Garrett - [Ajax: A New Approach to Web Applications](https://web.archive.org/web/20150910072359/http://adaptivepath.org/ideas/ajax-new-approach-web-applications/)
- Wikipedia for terminology
