# Layout

[TOC]


<!-- ToDo: Finish -->


## Box model

Elements can be thought of as boxes sitting on top of other boxes
can control properties of box
    padding, the space around the content. In the example below, it is the space around the paragraph text.
    border, the solid line that just outside the padding.
    margin, the space around the outside of the border.
    width
    background-color, the color behind an element's content and padding.
    color, the color of an element's content (usually text).
    text-shadow sets a drop shadow on the text inside an element.
    display sets the display mode of an element. (keep reading to learn more)


block element, meaning it takes up space on the page. A block element can have margin and other spacing values applied to it. In contrast, images are inline elements. It is not possible to apply margin or spacing values to inline elements. So to apply margins to the image, we must give the image block-level behavior using display: block;.

boxes overflow if don't fit ???, e.g. image larger than body




## Positioning

Normal flow: Inline items are laid out in the same way as the letters in words in text, one after the other across the available space until there is no more room, then starting a new line below. Block items stack vertically, like paragraphs and like the items in a bulleted list. Normal flow also includes relative positioning of block or inline items, and run-in boxes.
Floats: A floated item is taken out of the normal flow and shifted to the left or right as far as possible in the space available. Other elements then flow around the floated item, unless they are prevented from doing so by their clear property.
Absolute positioning: An absolutely positioned item has no place in, and no effect on, the normal flow of other items. It occupies its assigned position in its container independently of other items., can be fixed to point on page or on screen

-> can't use float on absolutely positioned element, i.e. position: absolute, position: fixed
-> can't use positioning properties top, bottom, left, and right on elements in normal flow, i.e. must have position: relative, absolute, fixed

absolutely positioned elements are removed from the flow of elements on the page, they don't affect each other at all, as if it was not there

### Position property

- controls positioning

Static: The default value places the item in the normal flow
Relative: The item is placed in the normal flow, and then shifted or offset from that position. Subsequent flow items are laid out as if the item had not been moved.
Absolute: Specifies absolute positioning. The element is positioned in relation to its nearest non-static ancestor.
Fixed: The item is absolutely positioned in a fixed position on the screen even as the rest of the document is scrolled

### Float property

left: The item floats to the left of the line that it would have appeared in; other items may flow around its right side.
right: The item floats to the right of the line that it would have appeared in; other items may flow around its left side.
clear: Forces an element to appear underneath ('clear') floated elements to the left (clear:left), right (clear:right) or both sides (clear:both)
