Languages/CSS/3. Viewport.md, before:

# Viewport

[TOC]



## Introduction

- visible area where document is rendered, i.e. user agent window excluding menu bar, etc.
- not affected by overlay controls, e.g. scrollbars, on-screen keyboard, etc.
- doesn't include overflow area
- embedded element creates own viewport for contents, content doesn't "see" top-level viewport, doesn't "know" it's embedded, e.g. iframe, object, SVG, etc.
- 2D coordinate system, origin in top left corner, x-axis to right, y-axis to bottom
- many properties are (eventually) relative to viewport, e.g. default width of root element, etc.



## Zoom

- magnification, enlargement of size
- scales length units

### Text zoom

- default font-size in user agent settings
- scales initial value of `font-size` property, by default `medium` (≙ `16px`)
- therefore scales font-relative units that (eventually) depend on initial value of `font-size`, e.g. `font-size` of root element, outside of property values, etc.
- doesn't scale other length units, e.g. font-relative units that don't (eventually) depend on initial value of `font-size`, line-relative units, viewport-relative units, absolute units, etc.
- can get overflow due to not scaling viewport
- usually affects layout of page
- can enable / disable by using only units that scale / don't scale

### Page zoom

- zoom in menu, keyboard zoom
- scales pixel unit, i.e. not closest integer to reference pixel anymore but some multiple
- therefore scales all other length units with it, see Data Types#Relative_Units
- size of viewport stays the same from perspective of user, its size shrinks from perspective of page, its size in pixels shrinks
- all units that (eventually) depend on viewport size stay same from perspective of user, do shrink from perspective of page, e.g. viewport-relative units, percentages, other relative units, etc.
- `position: fixed` elements don't move since relative to viewport, disrupt layout
- can get overflow due to not scaling viewport
- usually affects layout of page
- replaced by page scale
- can enable / disable by using only units that scale / don't scale

### Page scale

- zooming gestures, e.g. pinch-to-zoom
- scales pixel unit and viewport, see Layout and Visual Viewport
- `position: fixed` elements move, don't disrupt layout anymore
- can't get overflow due to scaling of viewport
- doesn't affect layout of page
- replaces page zoom
- can't enable / disable since always enabled, page doesn't "know" it's scaled, no work necessary 🎉
- beware: affects only VV of top-level window, not VV of embedded elements, e.g. iframe, object, SVG, etc.



## Layout and Visual Viewport

- viewport from perspective of page and user, separate notions for same thing
- beware: definition of viewport from perspective of user, from perspective of page on imaginary screen that scales with it, as if the user scaled up with it, page doesn't "know" (\*) that only part of it is visible on real screen ❗️
- beware: assumes screen media, not paged media ❗️
- logical size: size from perspective of user, in physical units (real, not CSS)
- virtual size: size from perspective of page, in pixel unit
- pixel unit is from perspective of page, shows virtual size not logical size, e.g. logical size can stay the same even though size in pixel shrinks
- layout viewport (LV): viewport from perspective of page, doesn't change virtual size if pixel unit is scaled
- visual viewport (VV): viewport from perspective of user, doesn't change logical size if pixel unit is scaled
- VV is affected / LV is not affected by overlay controls, e.g. scrollbar, on-screen keyboard, etc.
- if pixel unit is scaled up (positive zoom), virtual size of LV stays same and VV shrinks, logical size of LV grows and VV stays same
- in both logical and virtual size VV is smaller than LV
- if pixel unit is scaled down (negative zoom), virtual size of LV stays same and VV grows, logical size of LV shrinks and VV stays same
- in both logical and virtual size VV is bigger than LV
- if pixel unit is not scaled (no zoom), both logical and virtual size of LV and VV are the same
- layout of page doesn't change since LV and pixel unit scale together, page doesn't "know" (\*) it's scaled, like time dilated system that doesn't notice it's time dilated, as if user just had a magnifying glass
- values in page that depend on viewport are relative to LV, fixes problems of page zoom, e.g. viewport-relative units, `position: fixed` elements, CSSOM properties like `windows.innerWidth`/`innerHeight`, etc.
- (\*) see Visual Viewport API how page can read VV, e.g. fix elements to VV instead of LV, etc.



## Visual Viewport API

- API to read VV from within page
- in `visualViewport` global object
- read-only properties
- can use to fix position of elements to VV instead of LV, e.g. image controls, text formatting bar, etc.
- events `resize` and `scroll` on `visualViewport` when VV changes, don't bubble
- beware: embedded elements have own `visualViewport`, useless since VV is same as LV, e.g. iframe, object, SVG, etc.



## Initial size

- user agent can set initial size of viewport different from device width, emulate different screen size
- scales the pixel unit without scaling the (layout) viewport, i.e. identical to page zoom
- beware: not zoom, has nothing to do with LV and VV ❗️
- for example, mobile phones scale pixel unit down, like negative page zoom, emulate larger screen to layout unoptimised websites better, can then use page scale to zoom in, e.g. 980px width on iPhone

### Viewport meta tag

- tag in HTML head to set initial scale
- not official, possible browser inconsistencies
- use to set viewport to device width, i.e. disable emulation of different screen size

```html
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0">
```

- content is equivalent, `width` sets scale of pixel unit through size of viewport, `initial-scale` sets scale of pixel unit directly, needs both due to browser inconsistencies
- beware: don't use if page is not optimised for all screen sizes, otherwise stuck in same problem that user agent tried to solve for unoptimised websites ❗️
- beware: should have been CSS instead of HTML since presentation not semantics, but needs to be known before HTML body is parsed, e.g. for responsive images, `@viewport` was removed from CSS spec since not implemented, see [#258](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/258), [#4766](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/4766)



## References

(beware: resources show browser inconsistencies, bugs mostly fixed by now, e.g. `position: fixed` elements relative to VV instead of LV, CSSOM properties relative to VV instead of LV, etc.)

- [Peter-Paul Koch - Viewports visualisation app](https://www.quirksmode.org/mobile/viewports/)
- [Peter-Paul Koch - The Mobile Viewports](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8J6EdpXdzqc)
- [David Bokan - Visual Viewport Demo](https://bokand.github.io/viewport/)
- [David Bokan - Web Viewports Explainer](https://github.com/bokand/bokand.github.io/blob/master/web_viewports_explainer.md)

Commit message:

css/viewport: improve 'Viewport meta tag'

Languages/CSS/3. Viewport.md, after:

# Viewport

[TOC]



## Introduction

- visible area where document is rendered, i.e. user agent window excluding menu bar, etc.
- not affected by overlay controls, e.g. scrollbars, on-screen keyboard, etc.
- doesn't include overflow area
- embedded element creates own viewport for contents, content doesn't "see" top-level viewport, doesn't "know" it's embedded, e.g. iframe, object, SVG, etc.
- 2D coordinate system, origin in top left corner, x-axis to right, y-axis to bottom
- many properties are (eventually) relative to viewport, e.g. default width of root element, etc.



## Zoom

- magnification, enlargement of size
- scales length units

### Text zoom

- default font-size in user agent settings
- scales initial value of `font-size` property, by default `medium` (≙ `16px`)
- therefore scales font-relative units that (eventually) depend on initial value of `font-size`, e.g. `font-size` of root element, outside of property values, etc.
- doesn't scale other length units, e.g. font-relative units that don't (eventually) depend on initial value of `font-size`, line-relative units, viewport-relative units, absolute units, etc.
- can get overflow due to not scaling viewport
- usually affects layout of page
- can enable / disable by using only units that scale / don't scale

### Page zoom

- zoom in menu, keyboard zoom
- scales pixel unit, i.e. not closest integer to reference pixel anymore but some multiple
- therefore scales all other length units with it, see Data Types#Relative_Units
- size of viewport stays the same from perspective of user, its size shrinks from perspective of page, its size in pixels shrinks
- all units that (eventually) depend on viewport size stay same from perspective of user, do shrink from perspective of page, e.g. viewport-relative units, percentages, other relative units, etc.
- `position: fixed` elements don't move since relative to viewport, disrupt layout
- can get overflow due to not scaling viewport
- usually affects layout of page
- replaced by page scale
- can enable / disable by using only units that scale / don't scale

### Page scale

- zooming gestures, e.g. pinch-to-zoom
- scales pixel unit and viewport, see Layout and Visual Viewport
- `position: fixed` elements move, don't disrupt layout anymore
- can't get overflow due to scaling of viewport
- doesn't affect layout of page
- replaces page zoom
- can't enable / disable since always enabled, page doesn't "know" it's scaled, no work necessary 🎉
- beware: affects only VV of top-level window, not VV of embedded elements, e.g. iframe, object, SVG, etc.



## Layout and Visual Viewport

- viewport from perspective of page and user, separate notions for same thing
- beware: definition of viewport from perspective of user, from perspective of page on imaginary screen that scales with it, as if the user scaled up with it, page doesn't "know" (\*) that only part of it is visible on real screen ❗️
- beware: assumes screen media, not paged media ❗️
- logical size: size from perspective of user, in physical units (real, not CSS)
- virtual size: size from perspective of page, in pixel unit
- pixel unit is from perspective of page, shows virtual size not logical size, e.g. logical size can stay the same even though size in pixel shrinks
- layout viewport (LV): viewport from perspective of page, doesn't change virtual size if pixel unit is scaled
- visual viewport (VV): viewport from perspective of user, doesn't change logical size if pixel unit is scaled
- VV is affected / LV is not affected by overlay controls, e.g. scrollbar, on-screen keyboard, etc.
- if pixel unit is scaled up (positive zoom), virtual size of LV stays same and VV shrinks, logical size of LV grows and VV stays same
- in both logical and virtual size VV is smaller than LV
- if pixel unit is scaled down (negative zoom), virtual size of LV stays same and VV grows, logical size of LV shrinks and VV stays same
- in both logical and virtual size VV is bigger than LV
- if pixel unit is not scaled (no zoom), both logical and virtual size of LV and VV are the same
- layout of page doesn't change since LV and pixel unit scale together, page doesn't "know" (\*) it's scaled, like time dilated system that doesn't notice it's time dilated, as if user just had a magnifying glass
- values in page that depend on viewport are relative to LV, fixes problems of page zoom, e.g. viewport-relative units, `position: fixed` elements, CSSOM properties like `windows.innerWidth`/`innerHeight`, etc.
- (\*) see Visual Viewport API how page can read VV, e.g. fix elements to VV instead of LV, etc.



## Visual Viewport API

- API to read VV from within page
- in `visualViewport` global object
- read-only properties
- can use to fix position of elements to VV instead of LV, e.g. image controls, text formatting bar, etc.
- events `resize` and `scroll` on `visualViewport` when VV changes, don't bubble
- beware: embedded elements have own `visualViewport`, useless since VV is same as LV, e.g. iframe, object, SVG, etc.



## Initial size

- user agent can set initial size of viewport different from device width, emulate different screen size
- scales the pixel unit without scaling the (layout) viewport, i.e. identical to page zoom
- beware: not zoom, has nothing to do with LV and VV ❗️
- user agent on mobile phones scale pixel unit down, like negative page zoom, emulate larger screen to layout unoptimised websites better, can then use page scale to zoom in

### Viewport meta tag

- tag in HTML head to set initial size of viewport
- not official, browser inconsistencies
- only supported by user agents on mobile devices
- use to set viewport to device width, i.e. disable emulation of different screen size

```html
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width">
```

- `width`: width of viewport in pixel unit, pre-defined constant `device-width`, defaults to emulated screen size, e.g. `980px` on iOS Safari
- `height`: height of viewport in pixel unit, pre-defined constant `device-height`, defaults to fit aspect ratio of device to `width`
- specifies pixel unit through desired value for size of viewport, inverse logic
- beware: avoid zoom-related properties, inconsistent behavior, e.g. `initial-scale` to set value of initial zoom ❗️
- beware: don't use if page is not optimised for all screen sizes, otherwise stuck in same problem that user agent tried to solve for unoptimised websites ❗️
- beware: should have been CSS instead of HTML since presentation not semantics, but needs to be known before HTML body is parsed, e.g. for responsive images, `@viewport` was removed from CSS spec since not implemented, see [#258](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/258), [#4766](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/4766)



## References

(beware: resources show browser inconsistencies, bugs mostly fixed by now, e.g. `position: fixed` elements relative to VV instead of LV, CSSOM properties relative to VV instead of LV, etc.)

- [Peter-Paul Koch - Viewports visualisation app](https://www.quirksmode.org/mobile/viewports/)
- [Peter-Paul Koch - The Mobile Viewports](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8J6EdpXdzqc)
- [David Bokan - Visual Viewport Demo](https://bokand.github.io/viewport/)
- [David Bokan - Web Viewports Explainer](https://github.com/bokand/bokand.github.io/blob/master/web_viewports_explainer.md)
- [webhint - Meta Viewport](https://webhint.io/docs/user-guide/hints/hint-meta-viewport/)
