Languages/CSS/4. Box.md, before:

# Box

[TOC]



## Introduction

- visual representation of elements in a document
- every element is represented as a box (*)
- document tree is transformed into box tree
- box layout defines how box tree is rendered
- style of box is taken from properties of element (*)
- (* for exact details see Box generation)
- a box "contains" another box, if in the box tree it's a descendant of the box
- descendant box refers to box of descendant element



## Box

- rectangular content area with optional padding, border, and margin areas

![box](illustrations/box.svg)

- can think of box as four boxes in one, content box, padding box, border box, margin box
- content area contains the boxes content, e.g. text, image, descendant boxes, etc.
(since box tree hierarchy is same as document tree hierarchy, see Box generation)
- box size automatically adapts to fit content
- beware: descendant boxes can "overflow" their containing block, but actual content like text, image, not, see ???

<!-- TODO see css-break-4
a box can "break" into fragments, e.g. end of line, end of page on print, etc.
e.g. inline-level box which establishes a flow FC and has a block-level child box
-->



## Size

<!-- ToDo: incorporate tmp Size -->



## Margin

- visually separates box from other boxes
- margin properties specify thickness of margin area
- longhand `margin-*` for each side, shorthand `margin` for all four sides
- margin can be negative, results in ??? controlled overflow of parent box ??
- initial value is `0`, beware: user agent style sheet may set a value ❗️
- percentage refers to _width_ of containing block, beware: even for `margin-top` and `margin-bottom` ❗️
- beware: vertical margins have no effect on inline-level boxes, see Flow Layout

<!-- ToDo: margin collapse, see CSS2 8.3.1
? only vertical margins collapse
? in all FCs, or only in block layout ?
? margins DO collapse accross flow formatting context boundaries but not accross flow-root boundaries

beware: setting borders disables margin collapse !!!?!!!

not for out-of-flow boxes

BEWARE: vertical margins collapse between visually adjacent boxes, not necessary siblings in box tree, e.g. child in a deep flow FC chain with margin of sibling of highest ancestor establishing box??
very prone to error !!!
disables possibility for `box-sizing: margin-box`

-->

<!--  ToDo: see css-break-4
Margins adjoining a fragmentation break are sometimes truncated, e.g. on print
 -->



## Padding

- visually separates content from border
- padding properties specify thickness of padding area
- longhand `padding-*` for each side, shorthand `padding` for all four sides
- initial value is `0`
- percentage refers to _width_ of containing block, beware: even for `padding-top` and `padding-bottom` ❗️
- beware: user agent style sheet may set any value, overrides initial value ❗️



## Border

- visually confines box
beware: whole box still includes margin area, there is no empty space between boxes, all boxes touch each other, just margin is transparent ❗️
- border properties specify thickness and style of border area
- longhand `border-*-width` for each side's thickness, shorthand `border-width` for all four sides
- initial value is `medium`
- percentage is not defined ⚠️
- longhand `border-*-style` for each side's line style, shorthand `border-style` for all four sides
- initial value is `none`, color and width are ignored, i.e. no border by default ❗️
- longhand `border-*-color` for each side's color, shorthand `border-color` for all four sides
- initial value is value of `color` property
- shorthand `border-*` combines `border-*-width`, `border-*-color`, `border-*-style`, in any order
- shorthand `border` combines `border-*`, can't set different values for each side, unlike `margin` and `padding`
- beware: `border` resets all other border properties to its initial value ❗️
- beware: user agent style sheet may set any value, overrides initial value ❗️



## Background

<!-- ToDo: Finish, see css-background-3 -->

Each box has a background layer that may be fully transparent (the default), or filled with a color and/or one or more images. The background properties specify what color (background-color) and images (background-image) to use, and how they are sized, positioned, tiled, etc.

The background properties are not inherited, but the parent box’s background will shine through by default because of the initial transparent value on background-color.

background of the content, padding and border areas


- `background` of element styles background of content, padding and border area of box
- also `border` of element styles background of border area of bo
- background of margin area is always transparent, i.e. margin is "invisible", background of outer box shines through

background of element box by default within the padding edges
can be adjusted using the background-origin and background-clip properties

background by default within border edges ?!?!, overriden by initial value of border-color, can be seen with border-color: transparent


background-clip: sets whether an element's background extends underneath its border box (default), padding box, or content box
beware: solid border style masks the difference, needs to be opaque, dashed, etc.



## Color

<!-- ToDo: see css-color -->

color of an element's content (usually text).



## Resources

- [W3C - CSS Box Model Module Level 4](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-box-4/)
- [W3C - CSS Backgrounds and Borders Module Level 3](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-backgrounds-3/)

Commit message:

css: Size, rewrite pseudo-classes, add 'Replaced elements', minor corrections

Languages/CSS/4. Box.md, after:

# Box

[TOC]



## Introduction

- visual representation of elements in a document
- every element is represented as a box (*)
- document tree is transformed into box tree
- box layout defines how box tree is rendered
- style of box is taken from properties of element (*)
- (* for exact details see Box generation)
- a box "contains" another box, if in the box tree it's a descendant of the box
- descendant box refers to box of descendant element



## Box

- rectangular content area with optional padding, border, and margin areas

![box](illustrations/box.svg)

- can think of box as consisting of four sub-boxes, i.e. content box, padding box, border box, and margin box
- content area contains the boxes content, e.g. text, image, descendant boxes, etc.
(since box tree hierarchy is same as document tree hierarchy, see Box generation)
- box size automatically adapts to fit content
- beware: descendant boxes can "overflow" their containing block, but actual content like text, image, not, see ???

<!-- TODO see css-break-4
a box can "break" into fragments, e.g. end of line, end of page on print, etc.
e.g. inline-level box which establishes a flow FC and has a block-level child box
-->



## Margin

- visually separates box from other boxes
- margin properties specify thickness of margin area
- longhand `margin-*` for each side, shorthand `margin` for all four sides
- margin can be negative, results in ??? controlled overflow of parent box ??
- initial value is `0`, beware: user agent style sheet may set a value ❗️
- percentage refers to _width_ of containing block, beware: even for `margin-top` and `margin-bottom` ❗️
- beware: vertical margins have no effect on inline-level boxes, see Flow Layout

<!-- ToDo: margin collapse, see CSS2 8.3.1
? only vertical margins collapse
? in all FCs, or only in block layout ?
? margins DO collapse accross flow formatting context boundaries but not accross flow-root boundaries

beware: setting borders disables margin collapse !!!?!!!

not for out-of-flow boxes

BEWARE: vertical margins collapse between visually adjacent boxes, not necessary siblings in box tree, e.g. child in a deep flow FC chain with margin of sibling of highest ancestor establishing box??
very prone to error !!!
disables possibility for `box-sizing: margin-box`

one of the worst design choices, CSS should have version number to not need to be backwards compatible to be able to fix these issues ⚠️⚠️⚠️
-->

<!--  ToDo: see css-break-4
Margins adjoining a fragmentation break are sometimes truncated, e.g. on print
 -->



## Padding

- visually separates content from border
- padding properties specify thickness of padding area
- longhand `padding-*` for each side, shorthand `padding` for all four sides
- initial value is `0`
- percentage refers to _width_ of containing block, beware: even for `padding-top` and `padding-bottom` ❗️
- beware: user agent style sheet may set any value, overrides initial value ❗️



## Border

- visually confines box
beware: whole box still includes margin area, there is no empty space between boxes, all boxes touch each other, just margin is transparent ❗️
- border properties specify thickness and style of border area
- longhand `border-*-width` for each side's thickness, shorthand `border-width` for all four sides
- initial value is `medium`
- percentage is not defined ⚠️
- longhand `border-*-style` for each side's line style, shorthand `border-style` for all four sides
- initial value is `none`, color and width are ignored, i.e. no border by default ❗️
- longhand `border-*-color` for each side's color, shorthand `border-color` for all four sides
- initial value is value of `color` property
- shorthand `border-*` combines `border-*-width`, `border-*-color`, `border-*-style`, in any order
- shorthand `border` combines `border-*`, can't set different values for each side, unlike `margin` and `padding`
- beware: `border` resets all other border properties to its initial value ❗️
- beware: user agent style sheet may set any value, overrides initial value ❗️



## Outline

- like border, but drawn "on top of" box, doesn't affect layout
- `outline-width`, `outline-style`, `outline-color`, `outline` similar to border properties
- by default used for `:focus` state
- beware: don't disable for `:focus`, used for accessibility



## Background

<!-- ToDo: incorporate tmp Background -->



## Color

<!-- ToDo: see css-color -->

color of an element's content (usually text).



## Resources

- [W3C - CSS Box Model Module Level 4](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-box-4/)
- [W3C - CSS Backgrounds and Borders Module Level 3](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-backgrounds-3/)
