Languages/CSS/4. Layout.md, before:

# Layout

[TOC]



## Introduction

- arrangement of boxes
- affects size and position of box



## Box generation

- for each element one or more boxes (*) are created in box tree depending on layout
- box tree hierarchy stays the same as document tree hierarchy ❗
- outter most box is principal box, additional helper boxes are nested inside it
- principal box contains boxes of descendant elements, may be inside the helper boxes or beside it
- anonymous boxes that don't belong to any element may be created in addition to box(es) created by element
- (*) zero boxes may be created, see Box generation type

### Principal box

- main box of element
- contains generated??? content of element
- contains boxes of descendant elements
- is applied style of element, see Helper box for exceptions

### Helper box

- additional box of element
- nested in principal box, e.g. `display: list-item` generates an additional marker box within the principal box, `display: table` generates an additional table grid box within the principal wrapper table box
- inherits style from principal box through box tree
- some non-inherited properties are applied to helper box instead of principal box, e.g. border properties applied to `display: table` element are applied to its helper table grid box instead of its principal wrapper table box

### Anonymous box

- box that is not associated with an element
- fixes up box tree when a particular nested structure is required that is not provided by the boxes generated from the element tree, e.g. a table cell box generates an anonymous table row box around itself if its parent box is not a table row box
- inherits style from box tree parentage, since has no associated element



## Regular layout

- adaptive to surrounding boxes
- tries that nothing overlaps, overflows, etc.
- applied by a formatting context
- multiple regular layout types, e.g. flow layout, flex layout, grid layout, table layout, etc.
- beware: official terminology is "Normal Flow", won't use since unclear, historical roots from when only had Flow Layout ⚠️

### Formatting context

- a regular layout applied to a specific set of boxes
- can think of an instantiation of a regular layout, regular layout instance
- each box establishes a single formatting context for its child boxes
<!-- Check: more than one (dependent), or continues formatting context of its containing block, e.g. for ILB in ILB -->
- can visually think of as region of content area of the establishing box
- nested FCs build a FC tree similar to box tree
- nested FCs don't affect each other except through size of establishing box
<!-- Check: "dependent" FC -->
- (beware: non-layout related properties can still affect each other accross FC boundaries, e.g. margin collapse ❗️)
- a box is constrained by area of FC, i.e. content area of establishing box
<!-- ToDo: always CB?? What is CB?? -->
- a box only "sees" FC it's in, doesn't "know" about FCs higher up in chain
- beware: flow FC is historic exception, block-level boxes inside inline-level boxes "break out" and follow another flow FC higher up in FC chain, see Flow Layout ❗️

![nested formatting contexts](illustrations/fc.svg)

- beware: "out-of-flow" boxes don't follow their formatting context ❗️



## Irregular layout

- other form of layout than regular form using FCs
- takes precedence over regular layout, since each box is in a formatting context, "exception to the rule"
- "in-flow" box: box laid out using regular layout, i.e. follows formatting context it's in
- "out-of-flow" box: box laid out using irregular layout, i.e. doesn't follow formatting context it's in, positioned differently, interacts differently with surrounding boxes, "not part of normal flow of content in formatting context"
<!-- Check: O-O-F boxes create "independent" FC -->
- see Floats and Positioned Layout
- beware: can affect layout, but unlike Regular layout can't affect box tree ❗️
- taking a box "out-of-flow" blockifies it, see ODT
- beware: breaks adaptiveness of regular layout, e.g. can have overlaps, overflow, etc.



## Display type

- controls Box generation type and type(s) of regular layout of box(es) for element
- beware: should have separated box generation type and regular layout type in separate properties, bad design choice ⚠️
- behavior of box in a regular layout controlled by separate properties, e.g. `flex-flow` for flex layout, etc.
- beware: except behavior of box in Flow Layout, conflated with display type through ODT, historical baggage from when only had Flow Layout ⚠️
- beware: all elements have same initial display type, user agent style sheet overrides for "default layout", e.g. `p { display: block; }`, `em { display: inline; }`, `table { display: table; }`, `li { display: list-item; }`, etc. ❗️

### Box generation type

- controls box generation with zero boxes
- `display: none`: no boxes are generated for element and descendant
- as if element hadn't been in the document tree
- beware: only affects box tree but not document tree, i.e. selectors, property inheritance, event handling, etc. are not affected ❗️
- `display: contents`: no boxes are generated for element, but are generated for descendant elements
- as if element had been replaced in the document tree by its descendants
- beware: `::before` and `::after` pseudo-elements are treated like descendant elements, `::before` is first child, `::after` is last child
- beware: only affects box tree but not document tree, i.e. selectors, property inheritance, event handling, etc. are not affected ❗️

### Regular layout type

- controls formatting context (and behavior of Flow layout)
- `display: <display-outside> || <display-inside>`
- can be in any order
- beware: only affects visual layout, doesn't change semantics of element ❗️

#### Outer display type (ODT)

- behavior of principal box in Flow layout, see Flow Layout
- beware: should have been separate property, not conflated with IDT, e.g. "flow-type" ⚠️
- beware: has no effect if parent FC is not flow layout ???
- beware: affects layout of principal box in formatting context of parent box, not formatting context the principal box establishes for children ❗️ 

#### Inner display type (IDT)

- regular layout type applied by the formatting context for the child boxes
- additional helper boxes are generated for certain layouts, can depend on ODT of element
- the desired FC is established by the most nested helper box, others are wrapper boxes
- `flow` is default, for any outer display type

| IDT | PB name | PB FC | HB name | HB FC | condition |
| - | - | - | - | - | - |
| `flow` | flow container box | flow layout | - | - | - |
| `flow-root` | flow container box | flow layout | - | - | - |
| `flex` | flex container box | flex layout | - | - | - | - |
| `grid` | grid container box | grid layout | - | - | - | - |
| `ruby` | ruby container box | ruby layout | - | - | if ODT `inline` |
| `ruby` | wrapper box | flow layout | ruby container box | ruby layout | otherwise |
| `table` | wrapper table box | flow layout | table grid box | table layout | - |

#### Lists

- can append `list-item` to `display: <display-outside> || <display-inside>`
- generates additional `::marker` pseudo-element
- content of `::marker` is specified by list-style properties of element
<!-- ToDo: see CSS2 12.5 -->
- beware: often sets list-style properties on parent element so that inherits to any list-item children, e.g. on `<ul>`, `<ol>` to inherit to default `<li>`
- beware: user agent style sheet overrides initial value of `<li>` element with `li { display: list-item; }` ❗️

#### Defaulting

- initial value is `inline`, i.e. shorthand for `inline flow`
- if only one IDT or ODT is specified the other defaults
- beware: always specify both IDT and ODT for clarity ❗️

| shorthand | longhand | notes |
| - | - | - |
| `block` | `block flow` | since IDT defaults to `flow` |
| `flow-root` | `block flow-root` | since ODT defaults to `block` |
| `inline` | `inline flow` | since IDT defaults to `flow` |
| `flex` | `block flex` | since ODT defaults to `block` |
| `grid` | `block grid` | since ODT defaults to `block` |
| `table` | `block table` | since ODT defaults to `block` |
| `ruby` | `inline ruby` | since ODT defaults to `inline` ❗️|
| `list-item` | `block flow list-item` | since ODT defaults to `block` and IDT to `flow` |
| `inline list-item` | `inline flow list-item` | since IDT defaults to `flow` |

#### Single-keyword syntax

- shorthand value for ODT `inline`
- legacy, don't use anymore ❗️

| shorthand | longhand |
| - | - |
| `inline-block` | `inline flow-root` |
| `inline-flex` | `inline flex` |
| `inline-grid` | `inline grid` |
| `inline-table` | `inline table` |



## Resources

- [W3C - CSS Display Module Level 3](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-display-3/)

Commit message:

css: polish further, remove old file

Languages/CSS/4. Layout.md, after:

# Layout

[TOC]



## Introduction

- arrangement of boxes
- affects size and position of box



## Box generation

- for each element one or more boxes (*) are created in box tree depending on layout
- box tree hierarchy stays the same as document tree hierarchy ❗
- one box is the principal box, additional helper boxes may be created
- helper boxes are children or siblings of principal box, but not ancestors ❗️
- anonymous boxes that don't belong to any element may be created in addition to box(es) created by element
- (*) zero boxes may be created, see Box generation type
- beware: often says "the property of a box", but it's the property *of the element* that the box is generated for ❗

### Principal box

- main box of element
- contains boxes of descendant elements
- used for generated content of element
- is applied style of element, see Helper box for exceptions

### Helper box

- additional box of element
- nested in principal box, e.g. `display: list-item` generates an additional marker box within the principal box, `display: table` generates an additional table grid box within the principal wrapper table box
- inherits style from principal box through box tree
- some non-inherited properties are applied to helper box instead of principal box, e.g. border properties applied to `display: table` element are applied to its helper table grid box instead of its principal wrapper table box

### Anonymous box

- box that is not associated with an element
- fixes up box tree when a particular nested structure is required that is not provided by the boxes generated from the element tree, e.g. a table cell box generates an anonymous table row box around itself if its parent box is not a table row box
- inherits style from box tree parentage, since has no associated element



## Regular layout

- adaptive to surrounding boxes
- tries that nothing overlaps, overflows, etc.
- applied by a formatting context
- multiple regular layout types, e.g. flow layout, flex layout, grid layout, table layout, etc.
- beware: official terminology is "Normal Flow", won't use since unclear, historical roots from when only had Flow Layout ⚠️

### Formatting context

- a regular layout applied to a specific set of boxes
- can think of an instantiation of a regular layout, regular layout instance
- each box establishes a single formatting context for its child boxes
<!-- Check: more than one (dependent), or continues formatting context of its containing block, e.g. for ILB in ILB -->
- can visually think of as region of content area of the establishing box
- nested FCs build a FC tree similar to box tree
- nested FCs don't affect each other except through size of establishing box
<!-- Check: "dependent" FC -->
- (beware: non-layout related properties can still affect each other accross FC boundaries, e.g. margin collapse ❗️)
- a box is constrained by area of FC, i.e. content area of establishing box
<!-- ToDo: always CB?? What is CB?? -->
- a box only "sees" FC it's in, doesn't "know" about FCs higher up in chain
- beware: flow FC is historic exception, block-level boxes inside inline-level boxes "break out" and follow another flow FC higher up in FC chain, see Flow Layout ❗️

![nested formatting contexts](illustrations/fc.svg)

- beware: "out-of-flow" boxes don't follow their formatting context ❗️



## Irregular layout

- other form of layout than regular form using FCs
- takes precedence over regular layout, since each box is in a formatting context, "exception to the rule"
- "in-flow" box: box laid out using regular layout, i.e. follows formatting context it's in
- "out-of-flow" box: box laid out using irregular layout, i.e. doesn't follow formatting context it's in, positioned differently, interacts differently with surrounding boxes, "not part of normal flow of content in formatting context"
<!-- Check: O-O-F boxes create "independent" FC -->
- see Floats and Positioned Layout
- beware: can affect layout, but unlike Regular layout can't affect box tree ❗️
- taking a box "out-of-flow" blockifies it, see ODT
- beware: breaks adaptiveness of regular layout, e.g. can have overlaps, overflow, etc.



## Display type

- controls Box generation type and type of regular layout of box(es) for element
- beware: should have separated box generation type and regular layout type in separate properties, bad design choice ⚠️
- behavior of box within its FC controlled by separate properties, e.g. `flex-flow` for flex layout, ODT for flow layout, etc.
- beware: behavior of box in Flow Layout controlled by ODT, conflated with display type, historical baggage from when only had Flow Layout, see ODT ⚠️
- beware: all elements have same initial display type, user agent style sheet overrides for "default layout", e.g. `p { display: block; }`, `em { display: inline; }`, `table { display: table; }`, `li { display: list-item; }`, etc. ❗️

### Box generation type

- controls box generation with zero boxes
- `display: none`: no boxes are generated for element and descendant
- as if element hadn't been in the document tree
- removes element from accessibility tree
- beware: affects box tree, affects layout of surrounding boxes, use `visibility` property of element to make box transparent
- beware: only affects box tree but not document tree, i.e. selectors, property inheritance, event handling, etc. are not affected ❗️
- `display: contents`: no boxes are generated for element, but are generated for descendant elements
- as if element had been replaced in the document tree by its descendants
- doesn't remove element from accessibility tree
- beware: `::before` and `::after` pseudo-elements are treated like descendant elements, `::before` is first child, `::after` is last child
- beware: only affects box tree but not document tree, i.e. selectors, property inheritance, event handling, etc. are not affected ❗️

### Regular layout type

- controls formatting context (and behavior of Flow layout)
- `display: <display-outside> || <display-inside>`
- can be in any order
- beware: only affects visual layout, doesn't change semantics of element ❗️

#### Outer display type (ODT)

- behavior of principal box in Flow layout, see Flow Layout
- beware: should have been separate property, not conflated with IDT, e.g. "flow-type" ⚠️
- beware: has no effect if parent FC is not flow layout ???
- beware: affects layout of principal box in formatting context of parent box, not formatting context the principal box establishes for children ❗️ 

#### Inner display type (IDT)

- type of regular layout applied by the formatting context for the child boxes
- additional helper boxes are generated for certain layouts, can depend on ODT of element
- the desired FC is established by the most nested helper box, others are wrapper boxes
- `flow` is default, for any outer display type

| IDT | PB name | PB FC | HB name | HB FC | condition |
| - | - | - | - | - | - |
| `flow`(`-root`) | flow container box | flow layout | - | - | - |
| `flex` | flex container box | flex layout | - | - | - | - |
| `grid` | grid container box | grid layout | - | - | - | - |
| `ruby` | ruby container box | ruby layout | - | - | if ODT `inline` |
| `ruby` | wrapper box | flow layout | ruby container box | ruby layout | otherwise |
| `table` | wrapper table box | flow layout | table grid box | table layout | - |

#### Lists

- can append `list-item` to `display: <display-outside> || <display-inside>`
- generates additional `::marker` pseudo-element
- content of `::marker` is specified by `list-style-type` property of element
- image content of `::marker` is specified by `list-style-image` property of element
- position of `::marker` in box tree is specified by `list-style-position` property of element, can be child or sibling of principal box
- shorthand `list-style` to set all list-style properties
<!-- ToDo: see CSS2 12.5 -->
- beware: list-style properties inherit, can set on parent element to inherit to any list-item children, e.g. on `<ul>`, `<ol>` to inherit to `<li>`
- beware: user agent style sheet overrides initial value of `<li>` element with `li { display: list-item; }` ❗️

#### Defaulting

- initial value is `inline`, i.e. shorthand for `inline flow`
- if only one IDT or ODT is specified the other defaults
- beware: always specify both IDT and ODT for clarity ❗️

| shorthand | longhand | notes |
| - | - | - |
| `block` | `block flow` | since IDT defaults to `flow` |
| `flow-root` | `block flow-root` | since ODT defaults to `block` |
| `inline` | `inline flow` | since IDT defaults to `flow` |
| `flex` | `block flex` | since ODT defaults to `block` |
| `grid` | `block grid` | since ODT defaults to `block` |
| `table` | `block table` | since ODT defaults to `block` |
| `ruby` | `inline ruby` | since ODT defaults to `inline` ❗️|
| `list-item` | `block flow list-item` | since ODT defaults to `block` and IDT to `flow` |
| `inline list-item` | `inline flow list-item` | since IDT defaults to `flow` |

#### Single-keyword syntax

- shorthand value for ODT `inline`
- legacy, don't use anymore ❗️

| shorthand | longhand |
| - | - |
| `inline-block` | `inline flow-root` |
| `inline-flex` | `inline flex` |
| `inline-grid` | `inline grid` |
| `inline-table` | `inline table` |



## Resources

- [W3C - CSS Display Module Level 3](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-display-3/)
