Languages/CSS/4.1 Size.md, before:

# Size

[TOC]


<!-- ToDo: revisit once https://www.w3.org/TR/css-sizing-4 has been finished -->

## Introduction

- width and height of box, see NFP/Size
- beware: misused as synonym for the length in single one of the two spacial dimensions, e.g. `block-size`, `inline-size`, etc. ⚠️
- depends on content or context
- automatically sized by default, see Sizing value#`auto`
- custom size can't be set in certain cases, e.g. ODT `inline`
- beware: either box can overflow parent, or content can overflow box, see Overflow ❗️
- beware: don't set custom size, further constraints faciliate overflow ❗️
- can use padding, border and margin before setting any custom size
- can use `line-height` to automatically center content vertically, instead of `height`
- can set custom size of only one length, let other one adapt automatically, e.g. `width: 100%; height: auto`



## Sizing properties

- specify size of one of the sub-boxes, the others adapt, e.g. content box, padding box, border box, or margin box
- sub-box depends on Sizing values, only for `<length-percentage>` can control, see Sizing box
- not inherited
- percentage relative to `width`/`height` of containing block
- beware: don't use border to visualise size of box, affects layout since adds to total size, instead use browser Developer Tools ❗️

### Size

- specify size of box
- physical: `width`, `height`
- logical: `block-size`, `inline-size`, see Writing Mode
- can use relative units and fix bounds using minimum and maximum size properties

### Minimum size

- specify lower bound for size property, i.e. becomes size if size property falls below it
- physical: `min-width`, `min-height`
- logical: (`min-block-size`, `min-inline-size`, see Writing Mode
- beware: minimum size overrides maximum size if maximum size <= minimum size, no matter if where size is in the inequality, e.g. size <= maximum size <= minimum size, maximum size <= size <= minimum size, or maximum size <= minimum size <= size, i.e. minimum size is always applied ⚠️

### Maximum size

- specify upper bound for size property, i.e. becomes size if size property grows above it
- physical: `max-width`, `max-height`
- logical: `max-block-size`, `max-inline-size`, see Writing Mode
- beware: minimum size wins over maximum size if maximum size <= minimum size, minimum size is always applied, no matter what size is, e.g. size <= maximum size <= minimum size, maximum size <= size <= minimum size, or maximum size <= minimum size <= size ⚠️



## Sizing values

- values for sizing properties
- initial value: `auto` for size and minimum size properties, `none` for maximum size properties

### `auto` / `none`

- depends on layout properties
- `max-content` for ODT `inline`
- `stretch` for ODT `block`
- intrinsic size for replaced elements, e.g. images
- beware: always specify maximum size for replaced elements, otherwise may overflow ❗️
<!-- ToDo: What for out-of-flow elements? -->

### `<length-percentage>`

- size of sizing box, see Sizing box
- beware: by default sizing box is content box ❗️

### `min-content`

- minimum size of content box such that contents don't overflow

### `max-content`

- minimum size of content box such that contents don't overflow given infinite available space
- can think of as "ideal" preferred size
- beware: `min-content` <= `max-content` ❗️

### `stretch`

- maximum size of margin box in available space
- beware: `stretch` is not constrained by `min-`/`max-content`, i.e. `stretch` can be smaller than both ❗️

### `fit-content`

- `min(max-content, max(min-content, stretch))`

![size of box for each size value for different amounts of available space](illustrations/sizeval.svg)



## Sizing box

- sub-box to which sizing properties refer when sizing value is of `<length-percentage>`
- controlled by `box-sizing` property
- beware: property name should have been `sizing-box` ❗️
- values: `content-box`, `border-box`
- initial value: `content-box`
- not inherited
- beware: no `padding-box` and `margin-box` values ❗️
- beware: no `margin-box` keyword because of interference with margin collapse, bad design choice ❗️
- beware: doesn't set sub-box for non-`<length-percentage>` sizing values, e.g. `min-content, `max-content`, etc. ❗️
- can think of total size of box as size of visible box, i.e. border box, and margin only as spacer between boxes
- beware: by default needs to add padding and border to `<length-percentage>` to get total (visible) size of box ❗️
- beware: size of padding, border and margin area takes precedence over size of (sizing) box, i.e. if area of sub-boxes within (sizing) box is bigger than size of (sizing) box, then size of content box is set to zero and size of (sizing) box becomes as large as necessary to fit area of sub-boxes ⚠️

```html
<div></div>
```

```css
/* width computes to 2*30px + 2*40px = 140px */
div {
  box-sizing: border-box;
  width: 100px;
  padding: 0 30px;
  border-width: 0 40px;
}

/* just styling */
div {
  height: 1rem;
  background: lightgrey;
  border-style: solid;
  border-color: red
}
```



## References

- [W3C - CSS Box Sizing Module Level 4](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-sizing-4/)

Commit message:

css/layout: rewrite 'Irregular layout', don't use "out-of-flow" / "in-flow" terms css/positioned-layout: WIP

Languages/CSS/4.1 Size.md, after:

# Size

[TOC]


<!-- ToDo: revisit once https://www.w3.org/TR/css-sizing-4 has been finished -->

## Introduction

- width and height of box, see NFP/Size
- beware: misused as synonym for the length in single one of the two spacial dimensions, e.g. `block-size`, `inline-size`, etc. ⚠️
- automatically sized by default, see Sizing value#`auto`
- custom size can't be set in certain cases, e.g. ODT `inline`
- beware: either box can overflow parent, or content can overflow box, see Overflow ❗️
- beware: don't set custom size, further constraints faciliate overflow ❗️
- can use padding, border and margin before setting any custom size
- can use `line-height` to automatically center content vertically, instead of `height`
- can set custom size of only one length, let other one adapt automatically, e.g. `width: 100%; height: auto`



## Sizing properties

- specify size of one of the sub-boxes, the others adapt, e.g. content box, padding box, border box, or margin box
- sub-box depends on Sizing values, only for `<length-percentage>` can control, see Sizing box
- not inherited
- percentage relative to `width`/`height` of containing block
- beware: don't use border to visualise size of box, affects layout since adds to total size, instead use browser Developer Tools ❗️

### Size

- specify size of box
- physical: `width`, `height`
- logical: `block-size`, `inline-size`, see Writing Mode
- can use relative units and fix bounds using minimum and maximum size properties

### Minimum size

- specify lower bound for size property, i.e. becomes size if size property falls below it
- physical: `min-width`, `min-height`
- logical: (`min-block-size`, `min-inline-size`, see Writing Mode
- beware: minimum size overrides maximum size if maximum size <= minimum size, no matter if where size is in the inequality, e.g. size <= maximum size <= minimum size, maximum size <= size <= minimum size, or maximum size <= minimum size <= size, i.e. minimum size is always applied ⚠️

### Maximum size

- specify upper bound for size property, i.e. becomes size if size property grows above it
- physical: `max-width`, `max-height`
- logical: `max-block-size`, `max-inline-size`, see Writing Mode
- beware: minimum size wins over maximum size if maximum size <= minimum size, minimum size is always applied, no matter what size is, e.g. size <= maximum size <= minimum size, maximum size <= size <= minimum size, or maximum size <= minimum size <= size ⚠️



## Sizing values

- values for sizing properties
- initial value: `auto` for size and minimum size properties, `none` for maximum size properties
- depends on content or context

### `auto` / `none`

- depends on layout properties
- `max-content` for ODT `inline`, float, absolutely positioned element
- `stretch` for ODT `block`
- intrinsic size for replaced elements, e.g. images
- beware: `max-content` is zero for empty element, needs to explicitly set value, e.g. float, absolutely positioned element, etc.
- beware: always specify maximum size for replaced elements, otherwise may overflow ❗️
<!-- ToDo: What for irregularly laid out elements? -->
- depends on content or context

### `<length-percentage>`

- size of sizing box, see Sizing box
- beware: by default sizing box is content box ❗️
- beware: don't use, instead use dynamic values that automatically adapt if content or context changes ❗️
- depends on context

### `min-content`

- minimum size of content box such that contents don't overflow
- depends on content, i.e. zero if empty element ❗️

### `max-content`

- minimum size of content box such that contents don't overflow given infinite available space
- can think of as "ideal" preferred size
- beware: `min-content` <= `max-content` ❗️
- depends on content, i.e. zero if empty element ❗️

### `stretch`

- maximum size of margin box in available space
- beware: `stretch` is not constrained by `min-`/`max-content`, i.e. `stretch` can be smaller than both ❗️
- depends on context

### `fit-content`

- `min(max-content, max(min-content, stretch))`
- depends on content and context

![size of box for each size value for different amounts of available space](illustrations/sizeval.svg)



## Sizing box

- sub-box to which sizing properties refer when sizing value is of `<length-percentage>`
- controlled by `box-sizing` property
- beware: property name should have been `sizing-box` ❗️
- values: `content-box`, `border-box`
- initial value: `content-box`
- not inherited
- beware: no `padding-box` and `margin-box` values ❗️
- beware: no `margin-box` keyword because of interference with margin collapse, bad design choice ❗️
- beware: doesn't set sub-box for non-`<length-percentage>` sizing values, e.g. `min-content, `max-content`, etc. ❗️
- can think of total size of box as size of visible box, i.e. border box, and margin only as spacer between boxes
- beware: by default needs to add padding and border to `<length-percentage>` to get total (visible) size of box ❗️
- beware: size of padding, border and margin area takes precedence over size of (sizing) box, i.e. if area of sub-boxes within (sizing) box is bigger than size of (sizing) box, then size of content box is set to zero and size of (sizing) box becomes as large as necessary to fit area of sub-boxes ⚠️

```html
<div></div>
```

```css
/* width computes to 2*30px + 2*40px = 140px */
div {
  box-sizing: border-box;
  width: 100px;
  padding: 0 30px;
  border-width: 0 40px;
}

/* just styling */
div {
  height: 1rem;
  background: lightgrey;
  border-style: solid;
  border-color: red
}
```



## References

- [W3C - CSS Box Sizing Module Level 4](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-sizing-4/)
