Languages/CSS/6. Positioned Layout.md, before:

# Positioned Layout

[TOC]


## Introduction

different layout than others, takes boxes out of flow ??
can be used "on top of" all other layouts
need to manage the possibility of content overlapping

by default, size and position boxes in relation to each other so that nothing overlaps
size and position boxes based on their relationships with their sibling and ancestor boxes
--> position absolutely irrespectively of surrounding content

## Containing block

??only important for Positioned Layout

- rectangle with respect to which a box is sized and laid out / positioned
- derived from dimensions of a box, except for initial containing block ???

??? - principal box that establishes the current formatting context

- beware: a box is not confined by its containing block, can overflow ❗️
- initial containing block: containing block of the root element

<!-- ToDo: move to layout
e.g. inline box’s containing block is the content box of its closest block container ancestor;

if that block container is an in-flow block, then its containing block is formed by its parent block container;

if that grandparent block container is absolutely positioned, then its containing block is the padding edges of its closest positioned ancestor (not necessarily its parent)

and so on up to the initial containing block.


e.g. inline box’s containing block is the content box of its closest block container ancestor
absolutely positioned boxes containing block is the padding edges of its closest positioned ancestor
 -->

- beware: don't confuse content of box with boxes that have it as containing block, descendant boxes in box tree seem like content of box, but content can't overflow its box while a box can overflow its containing block

- beware: "a box's containing block" means the containing block of the box, not the one it establishes ❗️




##

absolutely positioned elements establish new block formatting contexts for their contents
Absolute positioning or floating an element blockifies the box’s display type.
making a box out-of-flow causes it to blockify as well as to establish an independent formatting context

## Relative

stays in flow, but can push around
other elements interact with it as if it were at original position


## Absolute / Fixed

removes box from flow, and any space that it would have taken up is removed, as if weren't in box tree, other elements can't interact with it, as if weren't there !!!

fixed: offsets are based on the viewport rather than the containing block

applies to principal box

## Resources

- [W3C - CSS Positioned Layout Module Level 3](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-position-3/)

Commit message:

css: rework Layout and Flow Layout, FC formatting context instead of block/inline FC

Languages/CSS/6. Positioned Layout.md, after:

# Positioned Layout

[TOC]


## Introduction

"on top of" other layouts
controlled by `position` property of element

different layout than others, takes boxes out of flow ??
can be used "on top of" all other layouts
need to manage the possibility of content overlapping


--> position absolutely irrespectively of surrounding content

if the box is absolutely positioned (via position) it's taken out-of-flow

## Containing block

??only important for Positioned Layout

- rectangle with respect to which a box is sized and laid out / positioned
- derived from dimensions of a box, except for initial containing block ???

??? - principal box that establishes the current formatting context

- beware: a box is not confined by its containing block, can overflow ❗️
- initial containing block: containing block of the root element

<!-- ToDo: move to layout
e.g. inline box’s containing block is the content box of its closest block container ancestor;

if that block container is an in-flow block, then its containing block is formed by its parent block container;

if that grandparent block container is absolutely positioned, then its containing block is the padding edges of its closest positioned ancestor (not necessarily its parent)

and so on up to the initial containing block.


e.g. inline box’s containing block is the content box of its closest block container ancestor
absolutely positioned boxes containing block is the padding edges of its closest positioned ancestor
 -->

- beware: don't confuse content of box with boxes that have it as containing block, descendant boxes in box tree seem like content of box, but content can't overflow its box while a box can overflow its containing block

- beware: "a box's containing block" means the containing block of the box, not the one it establishes ❗️




##

absolutely positioned elements establish new block formatting contexts for their contents
Absolute positioning or floating an element blockifies the box’s display type.
making a box out-of-flow causes it to blockify as well as to establish an independent formatting context

## Relative

stays in flow, but can push around
other elements interact with it as if it were at original position


## Absolute / Fixed

removes box from flow, and any space that it would have taken up is removed, as if weren't in box tree, other elements can't interact with it, as if weren't there !!!

fixed: offsets are based on the viewport rather than the containing block

applies to principal box

## Resources

- [W3C - CSS Positioned Layout Module Level 3](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-position-3/)
