Languages/CSS/7. Positioned Layout.md, before:

# Positioned Layout

[TOC]



## Introduction

- an irregular layout, can be used with any regular layout
- can use to position element anywhere on page, no matter regular layout of parent
- beware: can position elements off-screen, not reachable anymore for user ❗️
- beware: for sticky and fixed positioning assume screen media only, would be different for paged media ❗️



## `position` property

- specifies positioning scheme used
- not inherited
- values: `static`, `relative`, `absolute`, `sticky`, `fixed`
- initial value: `static`
- non-positioned elements: elements with `position` being `static`
- positioned elements: elements with `position` being not `static`
- positioned elements are stacked by default in front of non-positioned elements, see Stacking

### Static positioning

- no positioning scheme
- box is regularly laid out, i.e. follows FC it's in
- offset properties don't apply

### Relative positioning

- offset relative to own margin box at `static` location
- space is not taken up by surrounding boxes, as if box were in `static` location
- keeps interacting with surrounding boxes, as if box were in `static` location
- parent grows to contain, as if box were in `static` location
- beware: position can change since dependent on FC, e.g. wrap to next line if ODT is `inline`
- can use to shift position while still keeping interaction

### Sticky positioning

- like relative positioning except offset origin
- offset relative to nearest scrollport, see Overflow
- offset is applied only after box reaches location, i.e. box "sticks" on scroll
- offset is applied only within content box of containing block, i.e. scrolled away after reaches end of containing block
- beware: can't use padding in containing block to extend space since sticks only within content box, needs to use size properties of containing block or last child ❗️
- beware: still interacts with surrounding boxes unlike fixed positioning 🎉
- can use to stick on scroll while still keeping interaction, e.g. sticky headers

### Absolute positioning

- offset relative to containing block
- space is taken up by surrounding boxes, as if box weren't in box tree at all
- doesn't interact with surrounding boxes, as if box weren't in box tree at all
- parent doesn't grow to contain, as if box weren't in box tree at all ⚠️
- beware: to contain needs to custom size parent large enough, or use other layout type than Absolute positioning, e.g. Float Layout, Flexbox Layout, etc. ❗️
- size becomes `max-content` by default, see Size#auto
<!-- ??? DEPENDING ON SELF-ALIGNMENT PROPERTIES -->
- beware: blockifies box ❗️
- `float` computes to `none`, i.e. overrides floating behavior in a flow FC ❗️
- can use to position anywhere on page

### Fixed positioning

- like absolute positioning
- containing block is usually viewport, i.e. box stays fixed on scroll, see Containing block
- beware: breaks page on page zoom since occupies more space, works with page scale only, see Viewport ⚠️⚠️⚠️
- beware: decreases scroll performance since browser needs to repaint layout instead of just shifting position of pixels ⚠️
- can use to position anywhere on screen, e.g. persistent navigation menu



## Offset properties

- specify location of margin box
- offset origin depends on positioning scheme, see above in `position` property
- apply only to positioned element
- beware: no effect on non-positioned elements ❗️
- physical properties: `top`, `left`, `right`, `bottom`, shorthand `inset` for all four
- logical properties: `inset-block-start`, `inset-block-end`, `inset-inline-start`, `inset-inline-end`, shorthands `inset-block` for `inset-block-*`, `inset-inline` for `inset-inline-*`, see Writing Mode
- beware: `inset` is physical shorthand for `top`, `bottom`, `left`, `right`, not a logical shorthand for `inset-*` ❗️
- value: `auto`, `<length-percentage>`
- initial value: `auto`
- not inherited
- percentage relative to `width`/`height` of containing block
- beware: don't confuse offset origin and `<percentage>` type in offset properties, `<percentage>` is relative to containing block in all positioning schemes (even `static`), offset origin only in absolute positioning ❗️
- start side: `top` in vertical axis, `left`/`right` in horizontal axis depending on if direction is `ltr`/`rtl`, see Writing Mode
- end side: opposite side of start side

### `auto`

- for relatively / stickily positioned element `auto` values on opposite sides behave as follows
  - if both sides are `auto`, both compute to zero, i.e. box stays in `static` location
  - if one side is `auto`, it computes to negation of other side, i.e. box is shifted
  - if both sides are non-`auto`, end side computes to `auto` since overconstrained, i.e. above case
- beware: size of a relatively / stickily positioned element is never changed ❗️
- for absolutely / fixedly positioned element `auto` values on opposite sides behave as follows
  - if both sides are `auto`, both compute such that size doesn't change, aligned according to self-alignment properties, i.e. box is shifted, by default start side aligned to `static` location
  <!-- ToDo: What are self-alignment properties? see https://www.w3.org/TR/css-align-3/#abspos-sizing -->
  - if one side is `auto`, it computes such that size doesn't change, i.e. box is shifted
  - if both sides are non-`auto`, if size is `auto` then box is resized, i.e. box is shifted and resized, if size is non-`auto` then end side computes to `auto` since overconstrained, i.e. above case
- beware: unchanged size is size before applying offset properties, i.e. for absolutely / fixedly positioned element `max-content` by default, see Size#auto
- beware: size of absolutely / fixedly positioned element is only changed when size is `auto` and both offset properties are non-`auto` ❗️

```css
p {
  position: absolute; /* fixed */
  width: 300px;
  left: 10px;
  /* end side ignored since width is explicitly set */
  right: 10px;
}
```



## Containing block

- ancestor box relative to which a descendant box is sized and positioned
- ancestor box depends on positioning scheme
- used for offset origin for absolutely / fixedly positioned elements
- used for `<percentage>` type in several box properties, e.g. padding, margin, size, offset properties, etc.
- beware: don't confuse offset origin and `<percentage>` type in offset properties, `<percentage>` is relative to containing block in all positioning schemes (even `static`), offset origin only in absolute positioning ❗️
- beware: even relevant outside of Positioned Layout for `<percentage>` type ❗️
- beware: should have been called "containing box", since not necessarily block-level element ❗️
- beware: a box is not confined by its containing block, can overflow ❗️
- beware: every box has a containing block, but not every box is a containing block ❗️
- beware: containing block is not necessarily parent ❗️

### Static, relative, sticky positioning

- content box of nearest ancestor box with ODT not inline
<!-- ??? no precise definition, spec uses old notion of FC that not every box established -->
- if no such ancestor exists, then viewport (in screen media) or the page area (in paged media)

### Absolute, fixed positioning

- nearest ancestor box that uses one of the properties `position` (only for absolute positioning), `transform`, `perspective`, `will-change`, `filter`, `contain`, etc. with certain values, see [MDN - Identifying the containing block](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Containing_block#Identifying_the_containing_block)
- padding box if ancestor has not ODT inline
- content box if ancestor has ODT inline, if split into fragments then of first and last fragment
- if no such ancestor exists, then viewport (in screen media) or the page area (in paged media)
- beware: for fixed positioning usually is ICB ❗️
- beware: often positions box relatively but without any offset just to make CB for absolutely positioned descendants ❗️
- beware: if ancestor is inline-level and split across lines, end might be located before start ❗️
- beware: if ancestor has custom size and sizing box is content box (default), the CB is bigger by size of padding ❗️
- beware: if ancestor has custom size and sizing box is border box, the CB is smaller by size of border ❗️



## Resources

- [W3C - CSS Positioned Layout Module Level 3](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-position-3/)
- [MDN - Identifying the containing block](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Containing_block#Identifying_the_containing_block)

Commit message:

css: rewrite Margin, add Margin Collapse css: clarify use of Padding and Border, clarify use of Flow Layout, fix ODT default, fix any missing distinctions of absolutely and fixedly positioned element

Languages/CSS/7. Positioned Layout.md, after:

# Positioned Layout

[TOC]



## Introduction

- an irregular layout, can be used with any regular layout
- can use to position element anywhere on page, no matter regular layout of parent
- beware: can position elements off-screen, not reachable anymore for user ❗️
- beware: for sticky and fixed positioning assume screen media only, would be different for paged media ❗️



## `position` property

- specifies positioning scheme used
- not inherited
- values: `static`, `relative`, `absolute`, `sticky`, `fixed`
- initial value: `static`
- non-positioned elements: elements with `position` being `static`
- positioned elements: elements with `position` being not `static`
- positioned elements are stacked by default in front of non-positioned elements, see Stacking
- beware: here use term "absolutely positioned element" only for element with `position: absolute`, not with `position: fixed` ❗️
- beware: here use term "relatively positioned element" only for element with `position: relative`, not with `position: sticky` ❗️

### Static positioning

- no positioning scheme
- box is regularly laid out, i.e. follows FC it's in
- offset properties don't apply

### Relative positioning

- offset relative to own margin box at `static` location
- space is not taken up by surrounding boxes, as if box were in `static` location
- keeps interacting with surrounding boxes, as if box were in `static` location
- parent grows to contain, as if box were in `static` location
- beware: position can change since dependent on FC, e.g. wrap to next line if ODT is `inline`
- can use to shift position while still keeping interaction

### Sticky positioning

- like relative positioning except offset origin
- offset relative to nearest scrollport, see Overflow
- offset is applied only after box reaches location, i.e. box "sticks" on scroll
- offset is applied only within content box of containing block, i.e. scrolled away after reaches end of containing block
- beware: can't use padding in containing block to extend space since sticks only within content box, needs to use size properties of containing block or last child ❗️
- beware: still interacts with surrounding boxes unlike fixed positioning 🎉
- can use to stick on scroll while still keeping interaction, e.g. sticky headers

### Absolute positioning

- offset relative to containing block
- space is taken up by surrounding boxes, as if box weren't in box tree at all
- doesn't interact with surrounding boxes, as if box weren't in box tree at all
- parent doesn't grow to contain, as if box weren't in box tree at all ⚠️
- beware: to contain needs to custom size parent large enough, or use other layout type than Absolute positioning, e.g. Float Layout, Flexbox Layout, etc. ❗️
- size becomes `max-content` by default, see Size#auto
<!-- ??? DEPENDING ON SELF-ALIGNMENT PROPERTIES -->
- beware: blockifies box ❗️
- `float` computes to `none`, i.e. overrides floating behavior in a flow FC ❗️
- can use to position anywhere on page

### Fixed positioning

- like absolute positioning
- containing block is usually viewport, i.e. box stays fixed on scroll, see Containing block
- beware: breaks page on page zoom since occupies more space, works with page scale only, see Viewport ⚠️⚠️⚠️
- beware: decreases scroll performance since browser needs to repaint layout instead of just shifting position of pixels ⚠️
- can use to position anywhere on screen, e.g. persistent navigation menu



## Offset properties

- specify location of margin box
- offset origin depends on positioning scheme, see above in `position` property
- apply only to positioned element
- beware: no effect on non-positioned elements ❗️
- physical properties: `top`, `left`, `right`, `bottom`, shorthand `inset` for all four
- logical properties: `inset-block-start`, `inset-block-end`, `inset-inline-start`, `inset-inline-end`, shorthands `inset-block` for `inset-block-*`, `inset-inline` for `inset-inline-*`, see Writing Mode
- beware: `inset` is physical shorthand for `top`, `bottom`, `left`, `right`, not a logical shorthand for `inset-*` ❗️
- value: `auto`, `<length-percentage>`
- initial value: `auto`
- not inherited
- percentage relative to `width`/`height` of containing block
- beware: don't confuse offset origin and `<percentage>` type in offset properties, `<percentage>` is relative to containing block in all positioning schemes (even `static`), offset origin only in absolute positioning ❗️
- start side: `top` in vertical axis, `left`/`right` in horizontal axis depending on if direction is `ltr`/`rtl`, see Writing Mode
- end side: opposite side of start side

### `auto`

- for relatively / stickily positioned element `auto` values on opposite sides behave as follows
  - if both sides are `auto`, both compute to zero, i.e. box stays in `static` location
  - if one side is `auto`, it computes to negation of other side, i.e. box is shifted
  - if both sides are non-`auto`, end side computes to `auto` since overconstrained, i.e. above case
- beware: size of a relatively / stickily positioned element is never changed ❗️
- for absolutely / fixedly positioned element `auto` values on opposite sides behave as follows
  - if both sides are `auto`, both compute such that size doesn't change, aligned according to self-alignment properties, i.e. box is shifted, by default start side aligned to `static` location
  <!-- ToDo: What are self-alignment properties? see https://www.w3.org/TR/css-align-3/#abspos-sizing -->
  - if one side is `auto`, it computes such that size doesn't change, i.e. box is shifted
  - if both sides are non-`auto`, if size is `auto` then box is resized, i.e. box is shifted and resized, if size is non-`auto` then end side computes to `auto` since overconstrained, i.e. above case
- beware: unchanged size is size before applying offset properties, i.e. for absolutely / fixedly positioned element `max-content` by default, see Size#auto
- beware: size of absolutely / fixedly positioned element is only changed when size is `auto` and both offset properties are non-`auto` ❗️

```css
p {
  position: absolute; /* fixed */
  width: 300px;
  left: 10px;
  /* end side ignored since width is explicitly set */
  right: 10px;
}
```



## Containing block

- ancestor box relative to which a descendant box is sized and positioned
- ancestor box depends on positioning scheme
- used for offset origin for absolutely / fixedly positioned elements
- used for `<percentage>` type in several box properties, e.g. padding, margin, size, offset properties, etc.
- beware: don't confuse offset origin and `<percentage>` type in offset properties, `<percentage>` is relative to containing block in all positioning schemes (even `static`), offset origin only in absolute positioning ❗️
- beware: even relevant outside of Positioned Layout for `<percentage>` type ❗️
- beware: should have been called "containing box", since not necessarily block-level element ❗️
- beware: a box is not confined by its containing block, can overflow ❗️
- beware: every box has a containing block, but not every box is a containing block ❗️
- beware: containing block is not necessarily parent ❗️

### Static, relative, sticky positioning

- content box of nearest ancestor box with ODT not inline
<!-- ??? no precise definition, spec uses old notion of FC that not every box established -->
- if no such ancestor exists, then viewport (in screen media) or the page area (in paged media)

### Absolute, fixed positioning

- nearest ancestor box that uses one of the properties `position` (only for absolute positioning), `transform`, `perspective`, `will-change`, `filter`, `contain`, etc. with certain values, see [MDN - Identifying the containing block](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Containing_block#Identifying_the_containing_block)
- padding box if ancestor has not ODT inline
- content box if ancestor has ODT inline, if split into fragments then of first and last fragment
- if no such ancestor exists, then viewport (in screen media) or the page area (in paged media)
- beware: for fixed positioning usually is ICB ❗️
- beware: often positions box relatively but without any offset just to make CB for absolutely positioned descendants ❗️
- beware: if ancestor is inline-level and split across lines, end might be located before start ❗️
- beware: if ancestor has custom size and sizing box is content box (default), the CB is bigger by size of padding ❗️
- beware: if ancestor has custom size and sizing box is border box, the CB is smaller by size of border ❗️



## Resources

- [W3C - CSS Positioned Layout Module Level 3](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-position-3/)
- [MDN - Identifying the containing block](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Containing_block#Identifying_the_containing_block)
