Languages/CSS/96. Text.md, before:

# Text

[TOC]


<!-- ToDo: finish -->

## Introduction

text style: `font-*`, `color`, `text-decoration`, `text-transform`, `text-shadow`
text layout: `text-align`, `hyphens`, `line-height`, `letter-spacing`, `word-spacing`, `text-indent`, `text-overflow`, `white-space`, `word-break`, writing mode properties
most text style properties are inherited ?? like font properties, `color`, ??


## Font

`font-family`
text font, e.g. `"Times New Roman"`
accepts `<string>` ??
font must be installed on OS or imported in `@font-face` rule
keywords are specified by user agent, e.g. `serif` is "Times New Roman", `sans-serif` is "Arial", `monospace` is "Courier New"
can specify multiple, browser chooses first available
initial value is `serif` ??
inherited??

`font-size`
text size, e.g. `20px`
accepts `<length>` ??
varies between fonts, usually highest glyph top to lowest glyph low ??
inherited??
initial value is `medium` ?? usually is `16px`
beware: make relative to initial value of `font-size` to allow for Text zoom, e.g. using `rem` and root element having default `font-size`
beware: use `rem`  instead of `em` because of scaling in nested elements



## Line height

- length between baselines of text in line boxes ???
if unit-less, then specified as multiple of font size value
initial value `normal` based on user agent, usually `1.2`
inherited??



## Resources

- ...
- [W3C - CSS Inline Layout Module Level 3](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-inline-3)
- [Elika J. Etemad - CSS Line Layout and Vertical Rhythm](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OtlGo48iTOk)

Commit message:

css: rewrite Box, rewrite and move Padding, Border, Outline into separate files, rewrite Layout css/introduction: shorthand properties have same value data type and initial value as longhands css/flow-layout: clarify horizontal margins in Inline Layout, clarify use of physical terminology, simplify comment css: make 'values' plural, correctly order 'not inherited',

Languages/CSS/96. Text.md, after:

# Text

[TOC]


<!-- ToDo: finish -->

## Introduction

text style: `font-*`, `color`, `text-decoration`, `text-transform`, `text-shadow`
text layout: `text-align`, `hyphens`, `line-height`, `letter-spacing`, `word-spacing`, `text-indent`, `text-overflow`, `white-space`, `word-break`, writing mode properties
most text style properties are inherited ?? like font properties, `color`, ??


## Font

`font-family`
text font, e.g. `"Times New Roman"`
accepts `<string>` ??
font must be installed on OS or imported in `@font-face` rule
keywords are specified by user agent, e.g. `serif` is "Times New Roman", `sans-serif` is "Arial", `monospace` is "Courier New"
can specify multiple, browser chooses first available
initial value is `serif` ??
inherited??

`font-size`
text size, e.g. `20px`
accepts `<length>` ??
varies between fonts, usually highest glyph top to lowest glyph low ??
inherited??
keywords are specified by user agent
initial value is `medium` ?? usually is `16px` ??
beware: make relative to initial value of `font-size` to allow for Text zoom, e.g. using `rem` and root element having default `font-size`
beware: use `rem`  instead of `em` because of scaling in nested elements



## Line height

- length between baselines of text in line boxes ???
if unit-less, then specified as multiple of font size value
initial value `normal` ?? usually `1.2`
inherited??
keywords are specified by user agent



## Color

<!-- ToDo: see css-color -->

color of an element's content (usually text).

beware: `color` should have been named `font-color` ❗️



## Resources

- ...
- [W3C - CSS Inline Layout Module Level 3](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-inline-3)
- [Elika J. Etemad - CSS Line Layout and Vertical Rhythm](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OtlGo48iTOk)
