1. Are additional boxes always nested in the principal box?

Besides the principal box an element may generate additional boxes

> for each element, CSS generates zero or more boxes as specified by that element’s display property. Typically, an element generates a single box, the principal box, which represents itself and contains its contents in the box tree. However, some display values (e.g. `display: list-item`) generate more than one box (e.g. a principal block box and a child marker box).

Are these additional boxes always nested in the principal box in the box tree? Or can they be a sibling to the principal box in the box tree?

Otherwise the principal box could be defined as the "outermost" box generated by the element in the box tree, since any additional boxes are nested within the principal box.

2. What is a formatting context?

What is the difference between creating a new independent FC and "continuing" the parent FC?

> A box either establishes a new independent formatting context or continues the formatting context of its containing block.

> Certain properties can force a box to establish an independent formatting context in cases where it wouldn’t ordinarily. For example, making a box out-of-flow causes it to blockify as well as to establish an independent formatting context. [..] Turning a block into a scroll container will cause it to establish an independent formatting context

Can two exist simultaneously?

> Note: A block container box can both establish a block formatting context and an inline formatting context simultaneously.

> an inline formatting context exists within and interacts with the block formatting context of the element that establishes it, and a ruby container overlays a ruby formatting context over the inline formatting context in which its ruby base container participates.

2. What is an inline formatting context?

Does it necessarily need a block wrapper box ("line box")? Or can it be within an inline-level box already in a line, i.e. in an inline box?

3. What is a block formatting context?


4. What is a block container?

Apparently it establishes an IFC if it only contains inline-level boxes.

Otherwise it establishes a BFC.